The  Second Book of Maccabees  is found in the books of the  Septuagint , the Old Testament accepted as inspired and canonical by the  Orthodox Church  in the  Greek Orthodox Bible , and found in the books of the Old Testament of the  Vulgate  and included in the canon of inspired scripture by the  Third Council of Carthage (397) . It is included in the canon of the  Ethiopian Orthodox Bible . Since the  Council of Trent  it is  dogmatically  accepted as inspired and canonical by the  Catholic Church  in the  Catholic Bible —books of the Bible accepted as divinely inspired by the majority of Christian believers in the United States and throughout the world. [1] [2]

2 Maccabees was first removed from the Old Testament and placed in the Apocrypha by Martin Luther in the 16th century. The Second Book of Maccabees is regarded as an apocryphal book of the Old Testament by less than one-third of Christian believers. [2]

See  Apocrypha See  Biblical Canon

2 Maccabees  is one of the Historical books of the Bible, similar in tone to the books of Kings and Chronicles and Joshua and Judges. It is a religious summary or epitome by an unknown author of a 5 volume work by an unknown Jason of Cyrene, covering the history of the Jews from the time of the rise of  Alexander the Great  during the  high priesthood  of  Jaddua  about 333 B.C., through the persecution of  Antiochus IV Epiphanes , and the resistance of the  Maccabees  under Judas Maccabeus. The book is prefaced by copies of official correspondence sent to the Jews in Egypt in 124 B.C., and a second document addressed to Aristobulus II "of the family of the anointed priests" Hasmonean high priest of the nation 66 to 63 B.C. in the time of  Pompey  of Rome. The book was evidently written shortly after that time as an encouragement to the Jews to remain faithful to God with confidence in his power over the nations.

2 Maccabees Chapter 10:1-8  relates the triumphant recovery and dedication of the Temple after the defilement of the pagans and apostate Jews who had gone over to  Hellenism . The  Feast of the Dedication  is mentioned in the  Gospel According to John, chapter 10:22-23.  Today this celebration is called  Ḥanukkah . It demonstrates the miraculous providence of God in preserving the nation in the face of violent religious oppression, and the overcoming of pagan forces seeking the annihilation of the Jews and the destruction of the books (scrolls) of the sacred scriptures containing the written Word of God. It ends with the triumphant defeat of Nicanor, the Syrian general, his beheading, and the decree that this day be celebrated, the 13th day of Adar, the day before Purim on the 14th and 15th day of Adar the 12th month of the Jewish calendar.

The chapter summary headings as they appear in the Douay-Rheims Bible are as follows:

See  Literalist Bible chronology

Some commentaries and footnotes on the deuterocanonical/apocrypha books of 1 and 2 Maccabees state that there are 3 conflicting accounts of the death of Antiochus IV Epiphanes in these works, [3]  some writers adducing from this interpretive reading of the text ( and other perceived indications ) that the books are false and unhistorical, full of errors, and therefore apocryphal. They are evidently misled by the name "Antiochus" into believing that all 3 accounts are drawn from independent and conflicting sources, each attempting to describe the death of one man, and not of different men, each of whom was named Antiochus, and that they were collected together without any attempt at editorial correction, harmonizing, or comment on their differences by the author of the book. Our recent custom of numbering kings with the same name as I, II, III, IV, V, etc., the First, the Second, the Third, the Fourth, the Fifth, etc. is unknown in antiquity, and is perhaps a factor contributing to the confusion of identity. However, the text alone of the books of the Maccabees mentions distinctly separate individuals having each the name of "Antiochus" combined with a second  nomen  (see  Topical Bible: Antiochus ):

This aggressive military action of Antiochus X against Jerusalem is related indirectly by Josephus,  Antiquities of the Jews , Book 14, Chapters 2—4 , in which he relates that numbers of men swarmed out of Persia and fought against the Jews, and the holy city. The second letter of 2 Maccabees relates (1:13-16) the death of Antiochus X Eusebes and his men, [6]  during the course of a military expedition, as locked inside the temple of Nanaya/Nanea in Persia, [7]  stoned to death and beheaded by the priests. Mahlon H. Smith states that, according to Syrian records, Antiochus X Eusebes died fighting the Parthian Empire (which included Persian territory). [8] [9]  This Antiochus should not be confused with the earlier Antiochus IV Epiphanes, who failed to take Elymais and its temple, and afterward died of parasitic infection and decay in the mountains of Persia. 1 Maccabees 6:1-16; 2 Maccabees 9:1-10, 28.

See  Literalist Bible chronology .