Abraham Lincoln  was the 16th  President of the United States of America  serving from 1861 to 1865.  He led his country through its greatest crisis, the  American Civil War , abolished  slavery  and built a  Republican Party  coalition that dominated the  Third Party System .

Lincoln was  homeschooled  and almost completely self-taught, which likely gave him independent thinking, reliance on logic, and a desire to continue to learn as an adult. [1]  He is considered the most eloquent writer of any American president in history thus far. He is also one of the very few whose  faith  developed and grew while holding high public office.

Lincoln joined the new  Republican Party  after his party, the  Whig Party , was increasingly falling apart.  With a profound sense of American history, unswerving commitment to  Republicanism , and an almost  Shakespearean  command of the language, Lincoln articulated a vision of a new birth of freedom for the American nation. The destruction of the  Confederacy , and of the  slave power  that menaced  conservative  American values, affirmed Lincoln's vision in the  Gettysburg Address  (1863) and guaranteed that "government of the people by the people for the people, shall not perish from the earth."

Lincoln grew up in a hard-luck, hard-scrabble environment on 
the middle border.  His paternal ancestors were English; they migrated from Hingham, England, to Hingham Massachusetts, in 1637. In the 1730s they moved to backwoods Pennsylvania and Virginia. His grandfather moved to Kentucky in 1782, where he was scalped by Indians raiding his farm in 1786. His father Thomas owned some farmland near Elizabethtown, where he farmed and worked as a carpenter.

Abe later wrote:

Abe was born in a backwoods cabin some three miles south of Hodgenville, Kentucky.  His father Thomas Lincoln was a sturdy man, committed to pioneering in the new lands of Kentucky and Indiana. He married Nancy Hanks on June 12, 1806, and together they had three children: Sarah, Abraham, and Thomas, who did not survive infancy. The family belonged to a Hardshell Baptist church; Abe ridiculed the preachers and never joined their church, or any other church.

Young Abraham’s earliest memories of his days in Kentucky involved helping his father plant some seeds of corn and sunflower, and a flood that washed them away.

In December 1816 Thomas had to pack up his family and leave for southwestern Indiana after a slaveowner with a better lawyer won title to his Kentucky property.

Penniless, the family in Indiana lived in a “half-faced” camp; a crude log structure with one side open to the elements, and there the family stayed as squatters on public land until Thomas had finished a permanent cabin; he later bought the land outright on which it stood. Helping Thomas clear the land and plowing the fields was Abe, who in sharp contrast to other boys developed a strong aversion to hunting. The poverty, Lincoln recalled, was “pretty pinching” at times, and by the age of nine he was a tall, lanky boy dressed rather ragged and unkempt.

Then the fall of 1818 brought the hardest blow: Nancy had died of the “milk sickness”, leaving Abraham without the mother whom he deeply loved. Some time later, Thomas had taken the buckboard and the mule, and left Abraham and Sarah on their own for two weeks; when he returned, he was with a new wife, Sarah Bush Johnson; she immediately made up for the absence of Nancy by replacing Abraham’s corn husk mattress with one of down, winning him over the first day.  The new step-mother treated both children with an even hand (she herself was a widow with three children, whom she had brought), but she became very fond of Abraham, and he in turn was fond of her, referring to her as his “angel mother” for the rest of his life.

Both of Abraham’s parents were nearly completely illiterate, and he himself had not much more than one year of formal education.  When he did go to school, it was by “littles” – a little here, a little there – and he would call it “blab” school, which meant that they had to recite their lessons constantly due to lack of paper, pencils, and chalk.  “Of course, when I came of age I did not know much. Still, somehow, I could read, write, and cipher to the rule of three; but that was all.”  The rule of three means up to one thousand.

His step-mother encouraged his reading as much as possible, and although Abraham did not have access to a large number of books, he would read as much of what was there, and read voraciously. He read John Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress,  Aesop’s Fables , Daniel DeFoe’s  Robinson Crusoe , Parson Weems's  Life and Memorable Actions of George Washington , Edward Gibbon’s  Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , and undoubtedly he read many times the only book his family actually owned, the Bible. He would walk for miles to borrow a book he heard about, and after his chores he would collapse into a heap in front of the fire and read for hours. He would say years later that his best friend was the man who let him borrow a book he hadn’t read yet.

The Lincolns moved to Illinois in March, 1830, with Abraham driving the team of oxen himself, a young man of 21, rawboned and lanky at six feet four inches tall.  But the years working on the Indiana farm also made him physically powerful, and on his arrival in Illinois he was soon to demonstrate the skill with which he could wield an axe, putting it to good use by clearing the trees and laying the fence on his father’s new farm; the speed with which he could take tree trunks and split them into the rails needed for the fencing just by using his axe earned him the nickname “rail-splitter.” He could make an axe flash and bite deep; one neighbor saying “He could sink an axe deeper into wood than any man I ever saw.” After a good deal of chopping, he could take the axe by its handle and hold it straight out away from his body, without a single quiver. (Sandburg, pg. 14) Good-natured as well, he would make friends easily, despite his awkward-looking stride and backwoods language.

Soon, he signed on as a deckhand on a flatboat, and made a voyage down the Mississippi River to New Orleans. When he returned he settled in a small town on the Sangamon River called New Salem, working as a store keeper, surveyor, or a postmaster, the later of which allowed him to be the first to read the arriving newspapers. Then talk went about town of Lincoln’s utter honesty, how he would walk six miles to return a few cents to a customer he had accidentally overcharged, or the woman that had bought some tea, and having used the wrong weight for the purchase, Lincoln made the correction and walked the many miles to her house to ensure she got the right order (Sandburg, pp 24–25).

In 1832 he enlisted in the Black Hawk War, and was elected captain of his company, but the only fighting he admitted seeing action in was the “many bloody struggles with the mosquitoes.”  After he was mustered out of his company, he aspired for the state legislature, losing the contest the first time he ran, then getting elected and re-elected several times afterward.  He had briefly thought about practicing the trade of blacksmithing, but his craving of reading led him to law books, which caused some serious studying. Lincoln passed the bar in 1836, and began a new career practicing law.

In the early 1840s, Lincoln had a habit of writing critical letters that skewered his political opponents unmercifully. In 1842, after the default of the state bank, Lincoln wrote a letter to the editor of the  Sangamo Journal  about Illinois' governor, treasurer and auditor's refusal to accept the state's own paper money for payment of debts. The letter directly attacked James Shields, the state auditor, who then challenged Lincoln to a duel. After taking lessons in swordsmanship, Lincoln met Shields on September 22, 1842 on a Missouri sandbar. Two mutual friends rushed to the scene and talked the two combatants into cancelling the duel. [3]

The following year he moved to the new state capital of Illinois, Springfield, becoming law partners with John T. Stuart, Stephan T. Logan, and finally William H. Herndon in 1844, who, although junior in age to Lincoln by a decade, made a good, balanced partner. Few records exist of their law business, and when they got paid for their services they split the cash, no matter who was paid. Lincoln would earn $1,200 - $1,500 annually within just a few years; by comparison circuit judges earned $750. But to earn it he kept busy and worked hard; often he would climb into his buggy and travel the circuit of neighboring counties and practice before the courts there.  And often the cases he would be involved in were petty

Years before he had tried, and failed, to push legislation through the state assembly to have the Sangamon River made navigable to New Salem; by 1850 the railroads were bringing business and prosperity to Illinois, and Lincoln, by virtue of the ease the railroad made in traveling to his courts, profited more. He had served as a lobbyist for the Illinois Central Railroad, enabling it to get a state charter; he would defend the company against McClean County’s unsuccessful efforts to tax it. He handles cases for other railroads, banks, manufacturing, and other large companies in the state; he handled some patent suits and a few criminal trials.  And he also saved the first bridge to cross the Mississippi River from demolition, when river interests demanded the bridge be taken down.

In Lincoln’s New Salem days he was introduced to the Clary’s Grove Boys, a group of rowdy men from a nearby town who came into New Salem to bully some of the townsmen.  The leader of the group was Jack Armstrong, whose challenge to wrestle the New Salem men usually resulted in Armstrong quickly throwing the unfortunate man to the ground. When he saw Lincoln, Armstrong dismissed the lanky young man as a pushover.  When they fought, neither man was able to throw the other. The battle ended in a draw, and the good-natured Lincoln made a new friend.  Armstrong would later be one of the men to elect Lincoln to lead the company of volunteers in the Black Hawk War. [4]

In 1856, Jack Armstrong’s son, William (or "Duff"), was charged with murder.  A witness claimed he had seen Duff and another kill a New Salem man late at night by the light of full moon.  Lincoln pulled out an almanac and proved that the witness could not have seen anything at all, as the moon was at its quarter and had actually set over an hour before.  Duff was acquitted, and Lincoln won the case. [4]

Andrew Jackson , the hero of New Orleans in the  War of 1812  and a Democrat from Tennessee, was in the White House when Lincoln first entered politics.  He shared with Jackson the sympathies for the common man, but differed in the role of government as related to it; Jackson stated the government should be separated from the economic enterprise, while Lincoln was of the view that “the legitimate object of government is to do for a community of people whatever they need to have done, but cannot do at all, or cannot do so well, for themselves, in their separate and individual capacities.”   Lincoln most associated himself with the Whig Party, as among their members Henry Clay and Daniel Webster both advocated a government should be encouraging business, and the development of the country to that end.  It was an easy choice for Lincoln: he saw Illinois as needing such aid to improve the development of its own economy.

In the Illinois State Legislature Lincoln found that politics could be detrimental and harsh, as well as rewarding.  An example of the former occurred in 1836, just as he gave a speech in support of his re-election.  Democrat John Forquer, also seeking election, used his response and acid tongue to denounce him. "This young man needs to be taken down" he said, pointing to Lincoln, "and I'm afraid the task devolves upon me." The success of Forquer's speech convinced some of Lincoln's own allies that his career was over.

But when Lincoln rose to make his rebuttal, he thought of Forquer, and what he had done recently in conniving with President Jackson to change parties; in reward for doing so he was made Government Land Register with a $3,000 annual salary. Forquer was then able to construct a fine new house in Springfield, complete with a curiosity residents had heard about from science but had never seen before: a lightning rod.  Before he entered the state house building that day, Lincoln spent a few minutes at Forquer's house staring at the thing, and having heard Forquer's speech later on, he thought of what he saw.  Lincoln's reply was blistering, and sealed Forquer's fate.

Lincoln also proposed state funding to construct a network of roads, railroads, and canals.  Both Whigs and Democrats would join in for the passing of this omnibus bill, but a business depression was created by the  panic of 1837 , and as a result most of the provisions in the bill were abandoned.  1837 was also marked by the murder of Elijah Lovejoy, a newspaperman from Alton who was killed by a mob due to his anti-slavery views.  The legislature introduced resolutions defending Southern slavery while condemning abolitionist societies, as per the U.S. Constitution.  In protest of the resolutions Lincoln, with a fellow legislator, drew up a declaration which stated that slavery was “founded on both injustice and bad policy,” while also declaring that “the promulgation of abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than to abate its evils.”

He only served one term in the United States Congress, 1847 to 1849, during which time he did little on legislative matters.  He did introduce a bill calling for a gradual emancipation of slaves within the District of Columbia, but since it hinged on the approval of the white citizens there, it only caused mild anger from abolitionists as well as slave holders, and was quietly dropped.  His one main issue was over the Mexican War, in which he condemned the American entry into it on false pretenses, particularly blaming current president James K. Polk. He worked toward the nomination of Zachary Taylor for the presidency, and when Taylor had won, Lincoln expected to be rewarded with the job of land commissioner, but failed.  He was voted out of office by his constituents, as they felt he was too critical of the war.  Disillusioned, he left politics and reentered his law practice.

He stayed out for five years, winning several cases before the courts, then in 1854 he had read in the papers that Stephan A. Douglas, his political rival and Democratic senator from Illinois, had placed before Congress a bill which would reopen the territory of the Louisiana Purchase to slavery, as well as allow settlers in the Kansas and Nebraska territories to vote for themselves whether or not they wanted it, a concept which was called “ popular sovereignty ” by Douglas.  The resulting  Kansas-Nebraska Act  would do nothing more than provoke violent opposition; a border war would result between Kansas and Missouri as both pro and anti-slavery forces would cause much bloodshed; and voters in the Old Northwest, Illinois among them, would react vehemently against it, resulting in the destruction of the Whigs as a political party, and the birth of the Republicans, of which Lincoln quickly became a member. [5]   The  Dred Scott  decision of 1856, in which a black man who sued for his freedom only to be told that he was never a citizen and had to remain a slave, only added more fuel to the fire, as the states were aligning slave versus free, North versus South.

As the leading member of the Republican Party in Illinois, Lincoln was nominated for the Senate seat held by Douglas at the Republican State Convention in Springfield on June 16, 1858.  The acceptance speech he gave has been called the  House Divided  speech, after the opening lines, which were based upon Matthew 12:25:

August through October, 1858 saw seven Illinois towns witnessing the  Lincoln-Douglas debates ; Douglas the national figure defending the choice of voters whether to accept slavery or not, and the little-known Lincoln taking a stand against slavery on political, social, and moral grounds.  Douglas never wavered from defending popular sovereignty, and he also played on the voters' fears of  black integration .  Stating blacks were inferior to whites, he appealed to racists by declaring that the government was "established upon the white basis.  It was made by white men, for the benefit of white men."   (TL 1, pg 106).  Lincoln on the other hand knew Douglas was in a war of his own with President  James Buchanan 's administration over acceptance of the Kansas constitution which barred slavery from the state, further alienating Southern Democratic support; the fear was that Douglas would be more appealing to moderate Republicans in the east.  Lincoln's strategy therefore was to point out and use the vast difference between the moral indifference to slavery as embodied by Douglas's popular sovereignty, and the moral wrong that slavery actually was as embodied by Republican opposition to it. Douglas was, Lincoln insisted, a man who did not care whether slavery was "voted up or voted down."  By his last debate, Lincoln would narrow the differences between himself and Douglas as the basic principle of right and wrong.

Douglas for his part knew how formidable his foe was, and declared that if he won, “it would be a hollow victory.” He did win, retaining his Senate seat, but by a narrow margin.

On May 18, 1860 at the Republican National Convention held in Chicago, Lincoln was nominated on the third ballot.  He then set aside his law practice and gave full-time to the direction of his campaign, with the object of first uniting the Republicans from anything with which the party could disagree over.  The Democrats were already divided, having nominated Douglas in Baltimore on the Northern platform of popular sovereignty, and John C. Breckenridge who was elected on a platform of states’ rights and slavery by Southern Democrats.  Lincoln won the  United States presidential election of 1860 , winning a clear majority in popular votes as well as electoral votes, despite winning no votes in the South.

For the social, political, economic and diplomatic history see  American Civil War homefront

The state of South Carolina proclaimed its secession from the Union in December, 1860, soon after Lincoln’s victory.  To try to prevent other states from following, compromises were hurriedly pushed through Congress, one of which, the  Corwin Amendment , guaranteed the existence of slavery in perpetuity where it already existed.  The failed  Crittenden Compromise  would have gone even further and permanently divided the territories between slave and free.  Lincoln publicly supported the Corwin Amendment, believing that it was already implicit in the Constitution; however, he opposed the Crittenden Compromise because it would have given slavery additional protections beyond what the Constitution already gave it.  Despite these attempted compromises, six more states seceded and joined with South Carolina to form the  Confederate States of America .

A crisis was thus forced upon Lincoln before he even entered the White House.  The Confederacy claimed  Fort Sumter , in South Carolina’s  Charleston  Harbor, and ordered its commander, Major  Robert Anderson  to turn it over.  He refused.  Lincoln, still in Springfield, asked  Winfield Scott , general in chief of the U.S. Army, to be prepared “to either hold, or retake, the forts, as the case may require, at, and after the inauguration.”

On the 4th of March, 1861, a few weeks after  Jefferson Davis  was inaugurated as president of the Confederacy, Abraham Lincoln was inaugurated as the nation's 16th president.  In his  first inaugural address  he reiterated his stance:  to not interfere with slavery where it existed, to prevent slavery from spreading in the territories, but above all to preserve the Union.  The substance of what he said was conciliatory, but it also mentioned the obvious

However, communications between the fort and Charleston broke down, and Confederate general  P.G.T. Beauregard , believing Fort Sumter had a supply ship on the way, ordered the fort shelled on April 14, 1865.  The Civil War had begun.

Lincoln’s goal was to preserve the Union; he would have been happy to preserve the peace as well, but he was willing to engage in a war to preserve it as well, a war he thought would be short.  After Fort Sumter he proclaimed a blockade of Southern ports and called for thousands of volunteers to enlist for ninety days.  He also believed that an overland war was inevitable, and he ordered forces on a march on the Virginia front, resulting in the first great defeat for the Union at  Bull Run  (July 21, 1861).  Shortly afterward, Lincoln issued a set of memoranda for the military, of which his basic thought was that armies in the field must advance concurrently and on several fronts.

“I expect to maintain this contest until successful, or till I die, or am conquered. Or my term expires, or Congress or the country forsakes me.”

– Abraham Lincoln, 1862.

Finding himself as the leader of a country now at war, Lincoln used a description of himself in which he let events control him, and then react to the problem.  It was something of himself that was used with success as a politician.  In this sense he was being practical, ready to employ an action or decision which would help the cause, and ready to abandon it and use another if the first failed.  But his first insight with which he held fast to, that of taking the fight to the enemy’s army, failed many times when successive generals tried to take the fight to the enemy’s capitol and failed, or failed in following up on a rare victory.  He had  George McClellan  on the Peninsula, but was beaten back during the Seven Days battles.  His replacement,  John Pope , lost in a repeat of Bull Run.  McClellan was back again, winning a victory at  Antietam , but failed to follow through in capturing the enemy’s army afterwards.  Then  Ambrose Burnside , followed by  Joseph Hooker , led the  Army of the Potomac  to massive defeats at  Fredericksburg  and  Chancellorsville , respectively.  Then  George Gordon Meade  was put in, just in time for the  Battle of Gettysburg ; Meade would not finish off the enemy either.   Robert E. Lee , the commander of the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia, commented on the frequent changes in generals.  “I’m afraid they’re going to find a general I cannot understand.”

Having seen what he done at  Donelson ,  Shiloh ,  Vicksburg , and  Chattanooga , Lincoln found the fighting general he was looking for in  Ulysses S. Grant .  In March 1864 he promoted Grant to lieutenant general and gave him command of all Federal armies.  Grant would have his headquarters in the field with Meade’s Army of the Potomac, and his subordinates William T. Sherman, Philip Sheridan, and George H. Thomas would each lead an army to take the fight to the enemy.  Halleck would be given a new title, chief of staff, and remain in Washington as the presidential liaison.  Secretary of War  Edwin M. Stanton  would be responsible for the procurement of men and supplies.  By this reorganization Lincoln created the structure of the high command in which all the energies of and resources of the country were mobilized into a grand strategy for the completion of the war.  It was all the more remarkable as prior to 1861, he had no knowledge of military theory or affairs; he threw himself into studying the subject that by 1864, he was considered to be something of a military genius.

Ann Rutledge played a part in stories as being the first woman Lincoln may have fallen in love with.  However, evidence is scant, and what surviving letters and documents there are indicate they were close friends.  She died in 1835 at the age of 22, and the entire community grieved with Lincoln.

The one true love of Lincoln’s life was a well-educated woman with a quick wit,  Mary Todd , from a well-to-do family in Springfield.  Lincoln endured a courtship that lasted two years (and was broken once), before they were married on November 4, 1842.  Together they would have four boys: Robert Todd, Edward Baker (“Eddie”, who died at age 4), William Wallace (“Willie”), and Thomas (“Tad”).  Willie and Tad were the first children in the White House, and the halls and gardens were filled with childish romps, especially from the rambunctious, uncontrollable Tad, who once took a group of office seekers there to see the president on a trip through a confusing maze of hanging laundry; drove a herd of goats inside; got into the attic and rang the servants’ bells for hours; and succeeded in getting his doll executed for sleeping on watch.

The Lincolns also had their share of quarrels, and stories passed through the years tended to exaggerate them, but existing letters between the two indicate they were like any other married couple.  They were devoted to each other’s company, and when apart they missed each other.  "I have fallen in love with her," Lincoln would write to a friend about Mary, "and have never fallen out."  Mary did have fits of temper and a sense of insecurity; while in the White House she had spells of simple jealousy which she staged in front of guests; sometimes the scene would be quite embarrassing.  She also rang up large bills for her personal wardrobe and redecorating the White House; Lincoln, when he found out one such bill which totaled near $20,000 and coupled with a request for Congress to appropriate the money needed to pay for it, displayed a rare occurrence of pure anger:

The early deaths of Eddie in 1850 and Willie in 1863 may have played a role in Mary’s eccentricity.  Lincoln did what he could to support her, even pointing out the presence of a nearby building which housed a sanitarium, hinting that Mary could be placed there if she didn't control herself over Willie's death.

In 1841, Lincoln had a flatboat trip down the Mississippi, and he saw sitting on board another boat a group of slaves chained together.  He described the sight in a letter to Joshua Speed in 1855: “You may remember, as I well do, that from Louisville to the mouth of the Ohio there were, on board, ten or a dozen slaves, shackled together with irons. That sight was a continual torment to me; and I see something like it every time I touch the Ohio, or any other slave-border.”

Though a gradualist, Lincoln hated slavery.  “I hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself,” he declared. “I hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world; enables the enemies of free institutions with plausibility to taunt us as hypocrites.” Lincoln often penned fragments on slavery.  He would begin it by starting a hypothetical vested interest in slavery, and end it with the only logical conclusion, that is was a great moral wrong.

In 1857, in response to  Stephen Douglas  with a focus on the  Dred Scott  decision, Lincoln recalled of the brilliance of the  Declaration of Independence  and its authors that they:

Lincoln was elected on a platform which pledged no interference with slavery where it had already existed, and he was hesitant to adopt an abolitionist policy.  He was concerned about the reaction of the border states should such a policy be enacted.  He was concerned about four million newly freed blacks being incorporated into the country’s social, economic, and political life.  Some individuals, such as General John C. Freemont, made it a point to proclaim freedom in districts which they had conquered; Lincoln revoked those proclamations.  In a letter to Horace Greely, Lincoln plainly stated

Lincoln was willing to play a major part in removing slavery altogether during the war.  He first proposed an idea in which slaves were to be freed gradually by the actions of the states, with the federal government sharing the cost of compensation.  None of the border states were willing to implement it, and no prominent African-American leader was willing to see newly freed blacks sent to Africa, as part of the idea called for.

But with the victory at Antietam in September 1862, Lincoln brought out an idea which he read before his cabinet, that slaves held in the Confederate States were declared to be free.  He would declare it formally with his  Emancipation Proclamation  on January 1, 1863.  Although it did not include those areas under Union control, and officially it was a war measure, it had a great deal of significance as a symbol, and European countries who had toyed with the idea of recognizing the Confederacy abandoned it and supported the Union.

Lincoln also felt that the freed slaves would be put back in chains at war's end, as the Proclamation itself was not constitutional.  But Lincoln was prepared for something else: he drafted the  Thirteenth Amendment  to the Constitution, which stated slavery was illegal except for crimes committed.  He also urged the Republican Party to add the proposed amendment as a plank to the 1864 presidential campaign, stating slavery was the cause of the war, and that the Proclamation had aimed “a death blow at this gigantic evil;” only by a constitutional amendment could slavery be rendered extinct.  After the election, Lincoln did not wait for the new Congress.  He got the two-thirds needed for ratification before the year was over, and rejoiced when his state of Illinois led the way.

Lincoln routinely acknowledged that a clear majority of the  Founding Fathers  condemned slavery. [9]   In his sixth debate with Steven Douglass, Lincoln argued that the Founding Fathers considered slavery wrong, and firmly expected it to die a natural death. [10]   In  Lincoln's Cooper Union Speech , [9]  as well as in Lincoln's "Peoria Speech", where he pointed out that "only argument they ever admitted in favor of slavery" was necessity, that they blamed the "British King for having permitted its introduction". [11]

In 1798, they prohibited the bringing of slaves from Africa, into the Mississippi Territory - this territory then comprising what are now the States of Mississippi and Alabama. This was ten years before they had the authority to do the same thing as to the States existing at the adoption of the constitution.

In 1800 they prohibited American citizens from trading in slaves between foreign countries - as, for instance, from Africa to Brazil.

In 1803 they passed a law in aid of one or two State laws, in restraint of the internal slave trade.

In 1807, in apparent hot haste, they passed the law, nearly a year in advance to take effect the first day of 1808 - the very first day the constitution would permit - prohibiting the African slave trade by heavy pecuniary and corporal penalties.

In 1820, finding these provisions ineffectual, they declared the trade piracy, and annexed to it, the extreme penalty of death.

Abraham Lincoln, like many other people of his day, believed, at least initially, that "Religion is a private affair between a man and his God."  Doubts about Lincoln's faith have arisen mainly because he never officially joined a church, which his political opponents used sometimes to accuse him.  He had a love of the Bible and memorized parts of the Bible, and used biblical allusions later on in political speech.  Lincoln said once that:
 "I doubt the possibility or propriety of settling the religion of Jesus Christ in the models of man-made  creeds  and  dogmas .  I cannot without mental reservations assent to long and complicated creeds and  catechisms ."

He also said on another occasion:

He also made statements that suggest a strong faith, such as when his father was ill:

As a supporter of the Christian religion and who recognized its beneficial effects, Lincoln stated to a Methodist delegation,

Regardless of Lincoln's views on faith as a youth, it seemed to grow as President.  Lincoln penciled in "under God" after "one nation" for his  Gettysburg Address  delivered on November 19, 1863.  The phrase "under God" was not in the early drafts.  Mrs. Lincoln recalled her husband's last words just prior to his assassination in Ford's Theater: "He said he wanted to visit the Holy Land and see those places hallowed by the footprints of the  Savior . He was saying there was no city he so much desired to see as Jerusalem." [13]

In 1864, a close friend of Lincoln's, Joshua Speed, confided in Lincoln that he did not accept the Bible as true. Lincoln famously replied, "Take all this book upon reason that you can, and the balance on faith, and you will live and die a happier and better man". 
After Lincoln was shot at Ford's theater two clergy claimed that he had made a secret trip from Washington to be baptized.  Also a Roman Catholic Priest claimed that Lincoln received the sacrament of baptism in secret.  Neither of these claims have any proof in White House records or his personal diary. [14]

In his  Cooper Union Address , Lincoln spoke of the sectionalism which was fracturing the country as a result of slavery; the Republican Party was new in 1859, and a serious threat to slavery's existence.  Lincoln and his party were called radical and destructive, but he counted himself among the earliest defenders of conservative principles, which was in essence a defense of time-honored, traditional values. Lincoln said that out of the 39 framers of the Constitution, 23 of the 39 voted on whether to prevent the spread of slavery, and that 21 of the 23 voted in favor of doing so. Lincoln therefore said that it was the pro-slavery South that was radically breaking with the tradition begun by those that created the Constitution. As Lincoln said:

A White House visitor, Orville Browning, told Lincoln's personal secretary John Nicolay one day that he had spoke to Lincoln sometime in 1861 on the subject of slavery; that if the right thing about slavery wasn't done, God just couldn't be on the side of the Union. Browning remembered Lincoln's reply: "What if the Almighty takes a different view of slavery than we do?", and right then and there Browning realized that Lincoln had thought very deeply on the subject, much deeper than Browning did. [15]

Lincoln was known to think long and deeply on various topics, and often he would take notes, write them on little scraps of paper, and stuff them into his tall stovepipe hat for later use.  When it was time for use, such as his "House Divided" speech, he pulled them out, laid them on a table, and would commence to writing.  He would sift through the subject, adding this, removing that, and sometimes he would stand in his empty room and deliver it out loud to an imaginary audience, testing the effects of what he spoke, and altering it as needed.  According to author Garry Wills, Lincoln brought to bear the rhetorical tone of the Greek Revival and Transcendental movements, in which spoken oratory was practiced in government and on the stage.  The leading speakers of this time, and whom Lincoln looked upon, were Danial Webster and Henry Clay, both of the Senate, and Edward Everett, a speaker much in demand.

The training he had given himself also enabled him to write a simple letter or a speech on the spot.  Words would flow clear when Lincoln wrote in his later years, and he didn't have to do twice one of his finest personal letters, one of consolation to Mrs. Bixby of Boston, who had lost five sons in the war.

What many consider his masterpiece is the  Gettysburg Address .  Here Lincoln, going through perhaps a dozen writes and re-writes of what he had thought on the subject, entirely changed the meaning of the war itself in a mere 272 words, and in so doing, according to Wills, remaking America.

That there had to be a certain degree of support to win the war was a given, and Lincoln strove to have unity for that effort in the North.  Politics was required, and Lincoln had a special knack for appealing to his fellows and talking to them at their own level and language.  He would smooth over lingering differences, and held the loyalty of those who were antagonistic to one another.

But the Democrats remained strong, and frequently clashed.  Its member included both war and peace Democrats; the peace side was called “Copperheads”, after the snake which strikes without warning while hidden.  Lincoln tried conciliating with both, but with the latter he had to resort to arrest at times, most famously to an Ohio Congressman, Clement L. Valandigham, who was arrested after he had repeatedly exhorted soldiers to desert.  He justified his actions on the grounds that the suspension of  habeas corpus  was necessary only in times of rebellion, insurrection, or when the public safety may require it, as stated in the Constitution; certainly the Civil War had met those specific conditions.  Many would dissent, and openly criticize Lincoln for arbitrarily violating the Constitution that he had sworn to preserve.  In response to the criticism in general, and the case of Valandigham in particular, Lincoln wrote:

Lincoln faced reelection against Democrat George McClellan in 1864, who promised a restoration of the Union, but waffled on many of its points, even abandoning the Democratic platform of armistice and peaceful separation.  Lincoln was able to beat him in the election, assisted by the timely victories of Sheridan in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia, and Sherman in Georgia.  Overtures of peace from Confederates were not wholly rejected.  On February 3, 1865, Lincoln met with Confederate commissioners, among them Vice President Alexander Stephens, on a steamship in Hampton Roads, Virginia.  There would be peace, he insisted, if the South would quit the war, abandon slavery, and accept re-unification, and once these conditions were met he would be gracious with pardons.  But his terms satisfied neither the Confederacy nor the Radical Republicans in Congress.

His postwar policy was one of compassion.  As he explained to his top leaders on board a riverboat, the City Queen, he wanted peace above all else.  His Second Inaugural Address expressed his point of healing the wounds caused by the war.

When asked specifically, he related the following, according to General Sherman, one of those present:

See also:  Assassination of Abraham Lincoln

Lincoln received the news of Lee’s surrender at Appomattox, Virginia, on April 9, and he was called out to the balcony of the White House that night by a large crowd gathered in celebration.  When asked to make a speech, Lincoln noticed a band among them, and made an unusual request.

He entered Richmond the following day, to the joyous delight of free blacks, who welcomed the arrival of "Father Abraham" as they called him, and he paid a visit to the Confederate White House, and sat at the desk of Jefferson Davis.  The only thing he asked for was a glass of water.

Just four days later on April 14 he attended a play at Ford's Theater.  It was called  Our American Cousin , with well-known stage actress Laura Keane and comedian Harry Hawke in the title role.  Unseen to the audience was another actor making his way quietly up the stairs to the president's private box,  John Wilkes Booth , a Southern sympathizer who had hatched a conspiracy with a few others to kill the president and other leading officials.  Booth entered the box, shot Lincoln in the head, stabbed a guest, and dropped to the stage, escaping behind the curtains.  Taken across the street to a boarding house, the mortally-wounded Lincoln was laid across a small bed in humble surroundings, similar it seemed, to where he was born.  He died at sunrise a few hours later.

"Now he belongs to the ages" Edwin Stanton was heard to say.

Dying as he did die, by the red hand of violence, killed, assassinated, taken off without warning, not because of personal hate…but because of his fidelity to union and liberty, he is doubly dear to us, and his memory will be precious forever.   [2]

Some liberals are taught and claim that Lincoln was a tyrant. That he alone trampled on the Constitution. That the civil war was not about slavery but about taxation. Also, he favored the white race.

The suspension of  Habeas corpus  is often brought up as an example. The fact remains that the South trampled the Constitution by breaking away from the Republic to form their own nation. It was the South that launched the first attack. It was the South that fought to keep slavery as a right. While Lincoln's actions may have been controversial, he made the tough decision to save the Republic. A merciful victor who was lenient on the South for their egregious actions. Freedom for the black man was the noble outcome that white Northerners gave their lives for.

Other liberals, however, claim that Lincoln was one of them,  trying to force the narrative  that the racists switched parties overnight. The take his "old and tired" quote but clip it just right to make it appear that he was a liberal.