Ahmed Mohamed , also known as "Clock Boy" is a 14-year-old Sudanese-Muslim student who rose to fame after a staged photo went viral. The mainstream media immediately presented a narrative of unjust racism and "Islamophobia" undertaken against a child, much alike their reporting of Trayvon Martin [see  George Zimmerman ] and "Gentle Giant" Michael Brown.  This took place on September 16, 2015; however, what followed showed the incident was likely a hoax perpetrated by Mohamed's father, Mohamed Elhassan Mohamed. Much the norm, the progressive media refuse to abandon their account continuing rather dishonestly Ahmed Mohamed was a victim of "Islamophobia" even after more righteous media discovered the truth.

How it happened? In a NASA T-shirt Mohamed Elhassan Mohamed asked his son be handcuffed by the Irving Police Department for photography, they politely complied. One of these photos was then tweeted by Anil Dash going viral.

The media resent law enforcement and Texas. But their Texas-sized hostile disdain reached unprecedented levels especially toward the Dallas metropolitan during May 2015 following an attempted massacre at an art exhibition held by  Pamela Geller  and  Geert Wilders  which exposed Islam lacks compatibility with freedom of speech while supporting murder. Consequently, fundamentalist Islam is contradictory to American core values and a severe threat to America's hard-earned prosperity and as with the media seeks to imperil both. Also, George W. Bush and Glenn Beck reside there which leftists cannot tolerate.

In this incident the media sought to further portray Texans as bigots while conferring special victim status to grievance-seeking Muslims.

Pamela Geller pointed out Mohamed Elhassan Mohamed debated Robert Spencer in May 2011 in order to establish fame and credibility for himself. [2]   However the media refuses to acknowledge  New York Times  best-selling author of  The Complete Infidel’s Guide to ISIS  since they dislike his work on Islam.

Ahmed Mohamed placed the internals of a digital alarm clock within a Vaultz pencil case (the size and shape of a briefcase) he claimed as an "invention" and brought to MacArthur High School a part of the Irving Independent School District.  He first showed this "invention" to his engineering teacher who instructed he put away knowing it would be mistaken by most as a bomb, then Ahmed took his "invention" to English class and programmed the alarm to beep.  His English teacher sent Ahmed to the principal's office who called the Irving Police.  The police knew Ahmed's "invention" wasn't an actual bomb even though the mainstream media pretended otherwise to assert the Irving Police are incompetent.  However less leftist media pointed out the police arrested Ahmed because making a hoax bomb thereby causing panic or a provocation to an official response by law enforcement officers is illegal in Texas.

Though Ahmed and the media believe otherwise the term invent [4]  was not applicable nor was swapping internals of a digital clock into a pencil case ingenious for a 14-year-old boy. Obama did not bother to inform Ahmed " You didn't build that ".

Before any facts were available under the hashtag #IStandWithAhmed progressives made known how upset they were about alleged racial profiling and "Islamaphobia". Barack Hussein Obama (Twitter), Hillary Clinton (Twitter), and Mark Zuckerburg (Facebook) lent their support, a random astronaut Chris Hadfield moved by Mohammed's NASA T-shirt also tweeted his thoughts. On Facebook, homosexual activist and Democratic party fundraiser George Takei who played a character on the 60's  Star Trek  likened Japanese war internment camps with "Islamaphobia". On September 16, illiberal [5] [6]  elected by Twin Cities' Somalian refugee population, Muslim congressman Keith Ellison brought an analog clock to Capitol Hill. On September 29, in Lower Manhattan's New York City Hall progressive mayor Bill de Blasio declared “Ahmed Day” near where Islamists destroyed the Twin Towers shamelessly ignoring extremist Islam created a more dangerous and less peaceful America. [7]

However except for the most ardent progressives left-wing reactionary support and outrage ended once the truth could no longer be suppressed, currently in the typical leftist manner Democrats choose to ignore the matter.