NatalieD-

1. I think there are several good reasons to learning  history . By studying our country’s past, we know the different mistakes that people have made, which helps us not to repeat them again in the future, and hopefully to prevent them. It also helps us create better government, economy, laws, and other things based on what succeeded and what failed in the past.

2. I think that we were right to enter the war, and that we entered at the right time. Until the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor the war didn’t really impact us. Until we had a reason, like the Japanese bombing Pearl Harbor, there was no need for us to get involved.

3. I think I like how it used to be, shortly after the birth of our country. America was a free country, with freedom of religion, freedom of speech, and many other liberties and benefits that other countries didn’t have. America was a pretty good place to live. Why shouldn’t other people have been able to come here and prosper from it as we did? Although it may seem unfair that people who work longer and harder should have our jobs even though they are not from our country, their work helped build America, and they have a right to it too. Today, many people are not willing to work hard. Lots of people go for easy, low-labor jobs such as computers, communications, and accounting. The foreign immigrants pick up a lot of the labor jobs that many Americans are too lazy to do.

4. I liked that America grew so much during this period of prosperity. There were many new inventions and accomplishments, such as the creation of jazz, radio broadcasting, movies, and the solo flight of Charles Lindbergh. These things and others helped advance America greatly toward what we have today.

5. I think the idea of the New Deal was good, but that it didn’t work out quite so well in reality. Simply creating jobs for people won’t work unless they can keep those jobs, and if there are no customers at a company or business, they will eventually have to close and the worker is once again jobless. A better plan might be to give people jobs that are needed, that won’t disappear, jobs with customers.

6.  Yes, I do. Even though they were terrible, and there were thousands of innocent lives lost, I thing that it was the only option. We needed Japan to surrender, if they didn't we would have had to invade the country, which would have cost more and more American lives, as well as Japanese. I think the bombs were necessary.

7.  Teddy Roosevelt, or his ghost, is looking at the White House as men from the House and Senate bring huge sticks of “dictatorial power,” inducing Teddy to exclaim how his own “big stick” is a mere “willow” in comparison. The cartoon represents the Democratic power in the House and Senate during the terms of FDR. The House and the Senate are gaining more dictatorial power and to get what they want. This was probably not made by a Democrat, but by a disapproving Republican. The date is somewhere in the early 1930’s.

H1. I think that  presidents are becoming more like followers as the years go by. Very few represent new or different choices that the people may or may not agree with. Many say they believe in certain causes because a majority of the country believes in them, and get elected. It causes you to wonder how many of them really believe in the causes they support. A lot of the popular causes tend to contradict each other, which also gives us reason to question.

H2.	During World War II, the Allied forces eventually agreed on the objective of defeating Germany first with a direct offensive against the European continent. Under a combined command headed by Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, they effectively massed their forces in England, deceived Germany regarding the point of invasion, collected intelligence on the disposition of German forces, and set the vast maneuver called Operation Overlord into motion. Also, the Germans were the first to effectively use the tactical offensive combination of air and tank power, which conquered much of Europe in World War II.

H3. Debate: Was it right to drop atomic bombs on Japan? Yes, I believe so. Even though they were terrible, and there were thousands of innocent lives lost, I thing that it was the only option. With war, there is no winner, and there is always death. It just depends on how many or how few of your people die.  Japan had to surrender, if they didn't we would have had to invade the country, costing thousands upon thousands of Americans. I think the bombs were necessary. However, I think they could have been dropped over Japanese military bases rather than innocent villages. That way the Japanese would have lost some of their army and fewer innocent people would have died.