JonathanR

1. What is your favorite period of time in American history, and why?  I don’t have a “favorite,” but I can mention one.  1945 – 1991.  I really do like the Cold War and I think I mentioned some of my reasons in the last homework, but there are more, like the expansion of technology, and more uses for computers.

2. Contrast President Ronald Reagan with President Bill Clinton.  Ronald Reagan was a very tenacious and stubborn man, but this was his power and it helped with the “Star Wars” plan, and many other things.  Bill Clinton was a sort of a ‘lazy president,’ letting his decisions to be won over to whoever could make him happiest.

3. What would you say is the most important trend or trends guiding American history?  Important trends don’t necessarily mean good ones, and the “theory of evolution” is one of those trends that is getting America into terrible things (I think we should be having more “Scopes’ trials”).

4. What is the most important threat to the future of America? Cite history to support your view.  Atheism and Karma.  Atheism is the belief that there is no God, and Karma is a philosophy of sorts that simply states: what goes around comes around.  But this is all wrong because no fair judgment ‘comes around,’ it comes directly from God with no turns on the way.  This is a very precarious position that America is in right now, leaning on the philosophies of man.  And I state from Casting Crown’s “While You Were Sleeping”: 
 United States of America 
 Looks like another silent night, 
 As we're sung to sleep by philosophies 
 That save the trees and kill the children.

H4. What is your view of the government spying on its own citizens, such as authorized by the Patriot Act?  I see it as this: If you look suspicious or are acting suspiciously, the government has the right to spy on you for a certain period of time (i.e. weeks, months etc.), and if they don’t get the information they were looking for, then they may question you (interrogate).

6. Describe two of the greatest achievements of Ronald Reagan.  Star Wars program which scared the Russians to the point where they thought we were bluffing, and the Berlin wall, where President Reagan told Mr. Gorbachev to tear down his wall with just one sentence, and it worked.  I bet everyone had these answers .

7. Explain during which century you think this map was drawn, and comment how America's achievements may have met or exceeded the expectations of the cartographer or other people of his time.  I would imagine this map being from the mid-1400s, to the mid-1500s.  Also North America is very small here due to lack of exploration.  I think that if the cartographer (map-maker) could have seen America today, I think it would most definitely impress him on how large prosperous this “little patch of land” that he saw it to be, actually was.