JessieH - DONE! HAHA!-

1. What was the "Revolution of 1800"? 
The election of 1800. It was called this, because it was the first calm, and peaceful election in quite some time.

2. If you were the president, would you have approved the Louisiana Purchase? Explain. 
Yes, I probably would have. Because even though the price seemed large, it would have given me more land for my country, and having all of that unexplored land would seem inviting to immigrates. And that's all the more land to feed my country, to plant crops, and if I didn't buy it, someone else would, and I couldn't be sure that the someone who bought it would be peaceful to my country. It was just a wise purchase.

3. Identify a cause of the War of 1812. 
One reason was because the British refused to take back it's forbidding of neutral countries to trade with European countries. So the US senate voted for war. There were 19 vote for war, and 13 against. It was the first time the US had declared war on another country. The formal declaration was on June 18.

4. Describe what you like most about the Monroe Administration. 
That it didn't let Europe make any more countries, and it raised Monroe's popularity, thus sparking the' Good feelings era'.

5. Explain what is meant by "Jacksonian Democracy." 
It was the political beliefs of Andrew Jackson (then president) and his followers.

6. Explain what the Marshall Court is known for. 
Just one thing that it's known for, it Cherokee Nation v. Georgia. It said that the Cherokees aren't a nation, or a country, and cannot sue.

7. Identify the figures in the cartoon, provide an approximate date, and describe the likely viewpoint of the cartoonist:

The text in the cartoon from left to right (clockwise direction) is:
John Bull: Pray Mr Bruin try if you can make up this little Difference between us-The Wasps and Hornets have Stung me so hard I wish I had never disturbed their Nests.

Columbia: I thank you Mr Bruin but I cannot trust the Bull. 'Tho he has promised to draw his HORNS he must be safe bound to the Stake before I treat with him.

Bruin: Let me unite your hands Madam-Johny and I have been very friendly since I sent him my Fleet to take care of----

Bruin is a bear, so he is likely to be representing Russia.
Columbia is representing the USA, 
And John Bull is representing Britain.

I'd date this picture around the war of 1812

The cartoonist's view point is probably neutral in war affairs, because I think that in the picture, Russia is trying to make peace between USA, and Britain.