ABC News reported:

More likely, it's because of the kids.

What?  Why would somebody who doesn't believe there's a god want his own offspring wasting their time in an enterprise he believes has no foundation in fact?  Especially a scientist.

The study, by sociologists Elaine Howard Ecklund of Rice and Kristen Schultz Lee of the University at Buffalo, found that many atheists want their children exposed to religion so that they can make up their own minds on what to believe.  In addition, church may provide a  better understanding of morality and ethics , and occasionally attending services may ease the conflict between spouses who disagree over the value of religion to their children, the study contends.

The research, published in the December issue of the Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, was based on in-depth interviews with 275 scientists at 21 "elite" research universities in the United States.  Sixty-one percent of the participants described themselves as either atheists or agnostics, and 17 percent of the non-believers had attended church more than once in the past year. [1]

The Public Religion Research Institute declares:

The lead researcher, Elaine Howard Ecklund, explains why atheists might find themselves within religious communities:

- Scientific identity – Study participants wish to expose their children to all sources of knowledge (including religion) and allow them to make their own, informed choices about a religious identity.

- Spousal influence – Study participants are involved in a religious institution because of influence from their spouse or partner.

- Desire for community – Study participants want a sense of community (moral or otherwise), even if they do not personally hold religious beliefs.

These findings suggest that many atheists, far from wanting to deny their children exposure to religious traditions, want to introduce them to religion in a way that allows them to make a thoughtful, informed decision about their own faith (or lack thereof). [2]

According to  Christian Today :

The  Christian Post  reported:

Those who fall into this category, according to the researchers, are nonbelievers who may have a philosophical appreciation for certain religious teachings, who like being part of a community, who want to stay in touch with their ethnic identity or who simply find beauty in certain religious traditions, symbols or rituals.

"The implication of this particular typology is that you could be sitting next to somebody in church right now who may, in fact, not buy into the theology that the rest of the congregation buys into," said principal researcher Christopher F. Silver in an interview with The Christian Post. [3]

See also:  Atheism and art/music  and  Argument from beauty

See also:   Atheist conferences

It is extremely rare for a Christian to attend an  atheist meeting /conference.  And the majority of atheists do not attend atheist meetings primarily due to apathy and because atheist meetings are often not as numerous and convenient to attend as religious gatherings (see:  Atheism and apathy  and  Participation in the atheist community is often difficult ).

In addition, atheist meetings often tend to be unexciting affairs. Atheist Francois Tremblay wrote: "One last problem that undermines any propagation of atheism is inspiration. Let's be honest here, 'there is no god!' is not a very motivating call for most people." [6]  See also:  Atheism vs. Christian revivals

At the  Reason Rally  and the 2010 global atheist convention in Australia, Christian offers were extended as far as debate, but the debate offers were declined by atheists (see:  Atheism and debate ). [7] [8]

See also:   Atheist conferences  and  Research on atheist conferences

In October 2010, an atheists' meeting was organized in the  United States  concerning the future direction of the atheist movement and 370 people attended. The  New York Times  described the attendees as "The largely white and male crowd — imagine a  Star Trek  convention, but older...". [9]

In 2011, Beliefnetnews reported concerning the race and gender of American atheist:

But making atheism more diverse is proving to be no easy task.

Surveys suggest most atheists are white men. A recent survey of 4,000 members of the Freedom from Religion Foundation found that 95 percent were white, and men comprised a majority. [10]

In October 2012, the atheist Susan Jacoby wrote in  The Humanist  concerning atheist meetings: "When I speak before non-college audiences — that is, audiences in which no one is required to be there to get credit for a college course — 75 percent of the people in the seats are men." [11]

In June 2010, atheist  PZ Myers  commented that atheist meetings tend to be significantly more attended by males. [5]

See also:  Atheism and women  and  Western atheism and race  and  Atheist nerds

Christian Today  reported about  British atheist  Sanderson Jones:

What started as a visit to his friend Dave Tomlison's church became an impromptu tour of London Christianity. The three churches he visited were St Luke's, Holloway, where Tomlinson (author of 'How to be a Bad Christian') is vicar, Hillsong in central London, and St Mary's Bryanston Square.

Contrary to popular belief, Jones said he found them welcoming places, and said churches should realise that there is much they are doing well.

"I think churches should recognise that they are already doing so much right," Jones says, referring to the idea of having people welcoming on the front door, and people knowing where and when to set up for coffee after church. "I went to the American Humanist Association and they had a special lecture on why it's important to be welcoming. It's just the most basic things which you'll take for granted in Churchland, which are in fact really powerful." [12]

See also:   Atheist factions

The Sunday Assembly "atheist church" movement was founded in 2013 by the secular humanists and comedians Pippa Evans and Sanderson Jones. [13]   In 2014, it was reported that there was a schism in the movement as far as whether or not they should use the word "atheist" in their movement and/or whether they should just cater to atheists. [13]

The Spectator  declares about  new atheist   Richard Dawkins  via an interview:

But at this point he turns it back around again. I try to clarify my own views to him. ‘You would feel deprived if there weren’t any churches?’ he asks. ‘Yes,’ I respond. He mulls this before replying. ‘I would feel deprived in the same spirit of the English cricket match that I mentioned, that is close to my heart. Yes, I would feel a loss there. I would feel an aesthetic loss. I would miss church bells, that kind of thing.’ [16]

Humor: