American History Homework Two-SarahW

1. I think the three most important causes of the American Revolution are 
a. The Colonists were used to independence and self-determination
b. British burdens affected all Colonists
c. Virtual Representation.

2. The phrase “taxation without representation” was used by the colonists, protesting against taxes put on them by Britain without a representative in parliament to speak on their behalf.

3. The Boston Tea Party was a protest against the Tea Act, which allowed the East India Tea Company to sell the colonies tea without having to pay the normal import taxes.  Samuel Adams led the Sons of Liberty in boarding the British East India Company ships and dumping all of their tea in the Boston Harbor.

4. I blame all of the Puritans for the Salem Witch Trials.  I don’t think it was any one person’s fault that the Salem Witch Trials occurred, but the fact that everyone believed that so many girls were witches that they had to have trials to empty the jails.

5. True, Colonies with more religious freedom (like Pennsylvania and Rhode Island) had less conflict with the King.  I say this because I don’t remember reading (and can’t find) any conflicts between the King and Pennsylvania or Rhode Island.

6. I don’t think a jury should be able to ignore a law to find a defendant “not guilty”.  In the Zenger Trial, it makes sense because the law was stupid.  Now though, all, or most, of our laws are logical and should not be changed.

7. The political cartoon of a broken snake represents the colonies.  Each part of the snake is a colony or group of colonies.  The words “Join, or Die” mean that the colonies will not survive if they are separate, but if they join together, they will be strong.  This was created by Benjamin Franklin in 1754.

H2.  Britain taxed the Colonies through Acts.  There were many acts, such as the Sugar Act, the Stamp Act, and the Townshend Act, which were huge taxes on the Colonists.  It was unfair of Britain to do this, because there was no representation for the Colonies in Parliament.

H3.  No one knows why the girls in the Salem Witch Trials had possession-like symptoms.  I think they had a form of dementia which caused them to hallucinate and believe they were witches and others were witches.

H5. England did not have the right to impose direct taxes on the Colonies.  The Colonies only had “virtual representation” in parliament, which doesn’t really count because they weren’t looking out for the Colonist’s best interests.  The taxes didn’t affect the people making them, so they were unfairly biased.