MadisonT

Answer the first five questions, and then two of the remaining three:

1. Describe the process for a case (lawsuit) in federal court, including where a federal case begins, where the first level of appeal is, and where the second possible level of appeal would be. Give a hypothetical example picking a beginning location in the nation for the case (e.g., New Jersey).

In Georgia, Joe Bennett sues Lillian Underwood, his neighbor, because her dog bit him. First, they will go to the district court level. Then they will go to the Court of Appeals that supervises the local court, and that court will come to a decision. Lets say that Mr. Bennett the looses the case. He can ask the U.S. Supreme Court to review this decision or not.

2. What is the Rule of Four?

The Rule of Four is, in a Supreme Court, if 4 out of 9 Supreme Court Justices vote to hear a case, a petition of cert is granted and the Supreme Court gives the case a full argument by both sides for a decision.

3. Are federal judges elected? Should they be? Also, give an example of a non-Article III judge, and explain what that term means.

No, federal judges are not elected. A non-Article III judge, such as a magistrate or bankruptcy judge, is a judge that is appointed 8 years in office that can be renewed. Also, their jobs are not guaranteed until they retirement.

4. What are the two types of cases that are litigated in federal courts?

The two cases that are litigated in the federal courts are when there is conflict between courts in different parts of the Nations, which the Court should resolve, and when there is the issue of immense national interest that the U.S Supreme Court should decide.

5. Discuss the influence of the media on politics.

Media a very strong influence on people watching and listening. Also, cause they are bias, they tend to take what politicians say and twist them into what they want to hear. Because the media is so strong of an influence, the people can take what they hear and make that into what they stand for or against.

6. Do you think it was smart for the Framers of the U.S. Constitution to agree to withhold information from the media during the Constitutional Convention? Explain.

I believe that it was very smart of the Framers to withhold information from the media. If they did not, rumors could have been spread through the media,

7. "All issues are political issues," observed George Orwell. Do you think this can be true even for sports, entertainment, or fast food? Pick an example and discuss it.

Politics can get into a lot of different issues, even in fast food restaurants, like Chick Fil A. The president of Chick Fil A  made a stand for marriage being between a man and a woman. Many people stopped going to Chick Fil A after the president said this, but even those who were pro gay came to support the fact that they had a freedom of speech.