In  Arizona Life Coalition vs. Stanton , 
515 F.3d 956 (9th Cir. 2008), [1]  the Court of Appeals for the  Ninth Circuit  reversed the lower court and held that "[m]essages conveyed through special organization plates—although possessing some characteristics of government speech—represent primarily private speech" that is protected by the  First Amendment .

Arizona Life Coalition ("Life Coalition") had appealed a summary judgment in favor of Stacey Stanton and other members of the Arizona License Plate Commission (collectively the "Commission"). Life Coalition argued that the Commission violated its First Amendment right to free speech and Fourteenth Amendment right to equal protection by arbitrarily denying its application for a special Arizona organization license plate that would portray its message "Choose Life."  The Court agreed that the Commission violated Life Coalition's First Amendment right to free speech, and the Court did not reach its equal protection argument.

The Court held that:

The Court ruled that by allowing organizations to obtain speciality license plates with their logo and motto, Arizona provided a forum in which philanthropic organizations, see Ariz. Rev. Code § 28-2404(B), can exercise their First Amendment rights in the hopes of raising money to support their cause

The Court distinguished Johanns v. Livestock Marketing Ass'n on the grounds that in Johanns the beef producers had no choice but to support the beef ad, while here there was nothing in the record to even suggest that Arizona intended to adopt the message of each special organization plate as its own state speech.  The Court relied on Faith Ctr. Church Evangelistic Ministries v. Glover, 480 F.3d 891, 908 (9th Cir. 2007), which held that the County intended to open its library meeting room to expressive activity when it allowed all "[n]on-profit and civic organizations, for-profit organizations, schools and governmental organizations" to use the meeting room for "meetings, programs, or activities of educational, cultural or community interest" (internal quotation marks omitted).

The Court rejected the argument that the Commission was entitled to chose not to enter the Choose Life/Pro-Choice debate:

The Court concluded that because the Commission denied Life Coalition's application on a ground not expressly related to the forum's purpose by discriminating on the basis of the viewpoint contained in its proposed message,
the Commission acted in violation of the First Amendment.

Judge Richard Tallman, who was appointed by President  Bill Clinton , delivered the opinion for the unanimous three-judge panel.