The  atheist agenda  refers to an extensive  ideology  and programme, common to avowed  atheists  (Atheists commonly fall on the  left  aisle of the political spectrum. See:  Atheism and politics  and  Secular left ).

The atheist Dr.  Gordon Stein  declared:

The atheist agenda includes these objectives:

The atheist  political  movement originated during the  French Revolution , as  Jacques Hébert  and the  Hébertists  seeking to create a national atheist religion, the  Cult of Reason  in opposition to  Robespierre 's theistic (though violently  deistic  and anti-Christian)  Cult of the Supreme Being .

Atheists' attempts to destroy faith were magnified in the 19th century, as philosophers such as  Comte  and  Marx  attempted to describe religion's downfall as inevitable, while  Darwin  and  Freud  attempted to twist science to support  atheism  in a  pseudoscientific  fashion. (Note that the vast majority of scientists remained Christian throughout the 18th-20th centuries.)

The agenda begins with education, as it is the most powerful way to impact the views of a populace.  Atheists force the teaching of evolution  as fact  into scientific curricula, while using lawsuits to silence critics and remove and prohibit  intelligent design . [2] [3] [4]

By doing so, atheists can remove the necessity of God in the universe in the minds of students, providing a foothold for atheist ideology, while connecting atheism with accepted scientific theory, though the link is nonsensical.

Atheist evolutionists routinely refuse to debate, notably as they typically lose to creationists, instead choosing to mock and deride creationism as not worth their time.

Atheists seek to not only make school sanctioning of religious activity illegal, but to make any profession or personal act of religion illegal in educational institutions.  This has had some limited success in the  United States , but is state policy in  France , where wearing religious clothing or symbols is an expulsion offense.  By limiting or removing religious expression in schools, atheists hope to reduce its impact in students' lives and, most importantly, limit opportunities to spread the word. The ultimate expression of this, to which all atheists aspire, was the prohibition of all forms of religious expression in  Communist -era  Albania  (1945-1991).

Atheists use biology and religious studies classes to:

Atheists also promote atheist propaganda through books, television, and film, such as the thinly veiled  His Dark Materials  trilogy and accompanying film  The Golden Compass .

In philosophy classes, atheists focus heavily on atheist and nihilist thinkers, especially  Descartes  and  Nietzsche , while ignoring far more important and influential Christian philosophers, such as  St. Augustine ,  Thomas Aquinas , and  Kant , in an attempt to paint atheism as intellectual and faith as foolish.

This is perhaps the broadest aspect of the atheist agenda.  It involves activity in virtually all spheres of public discourse, but especially  broadcast  and  print  media, as well as higher educational institutions. [5]

The primary route is through the liberal mainstream media, which routinely portrays religion and the faithful in a negative light.  Pro-atheist and anti-religious articles are routinely printed in newspapers and magazines, and even letters to the editor are selected in a biased fashion.  Portraying adherents of religion as intolerant, racist, or otherwise foolish is a key tactic in painting it in a negative manner.

Atheists and liberals are avidly attempting to discredit the impact of  Providence  in human  history  (see  Liberal Denials about History ), despite it being easily proven for centuries, since  Bacon  and  John Foxe , and its acceptance by the American  founding fathers .

In Australia, atheists have proposed to undermine Christian education by forcefully imposing the so-called 'ethics classes' (secularism) as a replacement [6]