According to the  Merriam-Webster dictionary ,  incest  is "sexual intercourse between persons so closely related that they are forbidden by law to marry; also:  the statutory crime of such a relationship." [2]

Lawrence Krauss  is a prominent atheist and atheist activist.  In response to the question, "Why is incest wrong?", Krauss said, "It's not clear to me that it is wrong." [3]   Krauss belongs to the  New Atheism  school of  atheism  which is a form of  militant atheism .

The YouTube channel  TheAmazingAtheist  is the most popular atheist YouTube channel with over 685,972 subscribers as of June 2015. [4]  The AmazingAtheist produced a video entitled   Atheist Libertarian Defends Incest, Polygamy and Cannibalism! . [5]  See also:  Atheism and cannibalism  and  Atheism, polyamory and other immoral relationships

See also:   Views on atheists  and  Atheism and social outcasts

In 2014, a University of Kentucky study was published by Will M. Gervais, which was entitled "Everything is permitted? People intuitively judge immorality as representative of atheists", and the study indicated that "even atheist participants viewed immorality as significantly more representative of atheists than of other people." [6]

A quotation from the abstract of Will M. Gervais' study "Everything is permitted? People intuitively judge immorality as representative of atheists":

See also:

The Christian Research Institute declared:

That atheists are incapable of judging spiritual matters leads some Christians to wonder why we even need to answer them at all, especially if they lack any objective, moral, or epistemological foundation for their claims. Moreover, most atheists do not customarily condemn the very practices that God condemns, for example, idolatry, adultery, and homosexuality. Predictably so, their values conflict with what God hates...

Incest.  Like all Ancient Near East (ANE) pantheons, the Canaanite pantheon was incestuous. Baal has sex with his mother Asherah,6 his sister Anat, and his daughter Pidray,7 and none of this is presented pejoratively. [9]

In recent years, various atheistic countries have had noticeable problems with bestiality (see:  Atheism and bestiality  and  Geographic areas where bestiality is posing a notable problem ).

See also:   Atheism and morality

Not possessing a  religious  basis for  morality , which can provide a legitimate basis for objective morality,  atheists  are fundamentally  incapable  of having a coherent system of morality. [10]   See: Atheist population and immorality  and  Atheism and morality

The  Barna Group  found that atheists and  agnostics  in America were more likely, than  theists  in America, to look upon the following behaviors as morally acceptable:  illegal drug use; excessive drinking; sexual relationships outside of marriage;  abortion ; cohabitating with someone of opposite sex outside of marriage; obscene language; gambling;  pornography  and obscene sexual behavior; and engaging in  homosexuality /bisexuality. [11]

Given the  many diseases associated with homosexuality , the  biblical  prohibition against homosexuality is quite arguably one of the  many examples where the Bible exhibited  knowledge that was ahead of its time .

The Bible exhibits a reasonable morality in regards incest. [12] [13] [14]