Historically,  atheists  have skewed towards the  left  side of the political aisle (see:  Atheism and politics  and  Secular left  and  Atheism and communism ). [3] [4] [5] [6] [7]

Although the secular left is known for ridiculing  religion  since at least the time of  French Revolution  (see:  Atheism and mockery ), the secular left is known for its humorlessness when it comes to others mocking of its ideology (See also:  Atheism and intolerance  and  Atheist hypocrisy ).

The writer James Thurber declared:

Heywood Gould wrote in  Heatstreet :

Bernie Sanders  admits he has a “bad sense of humor.” He won’t need it once his Revolution comes,

According to  Marxist  theorist Tom McLaughlin: “Under  Socialism  there will be no classes and consequently no class conflict. Humor will cease to reflect any objective reality and will wither away.”...

When  Jerry Seinfeld  revealed that fellow comedians had warned him away from colleges because they “were too PC,” he was savaged by the left media. Columnist Amanda Marcotte accused him of making excuses for being “a second rate hack.” [9]

The  new atheist   Richard Dawkins  said about  New Atheism , "[O]ur struggle is not so much an intellectual struggle, as a political one: What are we going to do about it?”. [12]

The  Shadow To Light blog  commenting on the new atheist strategy of using ridicule and mockery wrote:

As they have told us, the mockery and ridicule is part of a socio-political plan, meaning that it is propaganda...

Clearly, the ridicule/mockery is “used primarily to influence an audience and further an agenda” and to “produce an emotional rather than a rational response.” Thus, a movement that postures as if it champions reason is actually relying on propaganda, demonstrating the so-called committment to reason is a sham. [13]

Gayle Trotter wrote in  First Things  about Mary Eberstadt's satirical book on  New Atheism :

Why does she take on the New Atheists?  As Eberstadt said at her book launch, “their movement has repeatedly assailed religious people as self-righteous, ignorant of history, and humorless, all the while remaining self-righteous, ignorant of history, and humorless itself to a quite remarkable degree.”  As a result, “this movement aids and abets our cultural dumbing down.”  On another level, you might call The Loser Letters a defense of  western civilization  itself. [14]

Michael Schulson's   Slate  article entitled  Jonathan Sacks  on Richard Dawkins: “New atheists lack a sense of humor”  indicates:

Well, you know,  Bertrand Russell  was an atheist with a sense of humor. And the new atheists tend either to lack a sense of humor, or the only humor they’re capable of is sarcasm. I mean, somebody with a little intellectual humility does not say, “Anyone who disagrees with me is stupid.” [15]

See also:   Richard Dawkins and anger  and  Abrasiveness of Richard Dawkins

The movie  The Atheist Delusion  features the new atheist Richard Dawkins being the object of audience laughter due to something unreasonable he said. [16]  Dawkins indignantly asked the audience, "Why is that funny?". [17]

Dawkins has encouraged his supporters to ridicule religious believers and to go beyond humorous ridicule. [18]   He wrote, "I lately started to think that we need to go further: go beyond humorous ridicule, sharpen our barbs to a point where they really hurt." [19]  See also:  Richard Dawkins' cult of personality

See also:   Soviet atheism  and  Atheism and communism

According to the  University of Cambridge , historically, the "most notable spread of atheism was achieved through the success of the 1917  Russian Revolution , which brought the  Marxist-Leninists  to power." [20]  Vitalij Lazarʹevič Ginzburg, a Soviet physicist, wrote that the " Bolshevik  communists were not merely atheists but, according to  Lenin 's terminology,  militant atheists ." [21]   Soviet atheism / communism  advocated the spread of atheistic communism around the world and efforts were made to spread communism outside of Russia.

The  Soviet Union  practiced  state atheism  and the atheism was of a  militant atheism  variety. See also:  Soviet atheism  and  Atheism and communism

Listverse declares in its article  10 Bizarre Ways The Soviet Union Controlled Its People

Jokes against the state, of course, were forbidden, as was everything even remotely edgy. Even  jokes against the United States had to be tame. When the list came back, comedians were usually left with just a handful of tame jokes about their mother-in-laws. 

For the next year, they could only tell jokes from their approved list. Improvisation was strictly forbidden. The only way a comedian could keep an act fresh was to steal gags from the competition. Plagiarism was fine, as long as the material you stole was approved. [25]

The website Open Culture was about the Department of Jokes:

Yep. There’s a Department of Jokes. Actually, the Ministry of Culture has a very big department of humor. I’m serious now. Once a year they censor your material, and then you have to stay with what they have approved. You can`t improvise or do anything like that. You write out your material and mail it to them, and they send it back to you with corrections. After that, you stay with it for a year.

It is perhaps for this reason that comics in Soviet Russia borrowed liberally from each other, rarely did original material, and never, ever improvised. Says Smirnoff: “I would do some original material, but that would be unusual. Also, it was OK for comedians to borrow—if one of the big comedians went on television and did a monolog, next day 10 or 20 other comedians would do the same thing in clubs. That wasn’t considered stealing.” [26]

Vladimir Lenin  similarly wrote regarding  atheism and communism : "A Marxist must be a  materialist , i. e., an enemy of religion, but a dialectical materialist, i. e., one who treats the struggle against religion not in an abstract way, not on the basis of remote, purely theoretical, never varying preaching, but in a concrete way, on the basis of the  class struggle  which is going on in practice and is educating the masses more and better than anything else could." [27]

Craig A. Lockard, author of the book  Societies, Networks, and Transitions , described the militant atheist and  communist   Vladimir Lenin  as being "humorless and uncompromising". [28]

Joseph Stalin , the Premier of the  Soviet Union  from 1941 to 1953, patronised the  League of Militant Atheists , whose chief aim, under the leadership of Yemelyan Yaroslavsky, was to propagate  militant atheism  and eradicate  religion . [22] [23]

Dwight Eisenhower  said that Joseph Stalin was humorless. [29]

See also:   Atheism and sloth

Soviet state atheism  was largely unsuccessful in making converts as a whole and state atheism had more success in urban regions than rural regions. [30]  See also:  Atheism and its retention rate in individuals

In the former  Soviet Union , a popular joke was that the workers pretended to work and the Soviet Union pretended to pay them. [31]

In 1955,  Chinese  communist leader Zhou Enlai declared, "We Communists are atheists". [32]  In 2014, the Communist Party of China reaffirmed that members of their party must be atheists. [33]

Jiang Qing was the Chinese communist  Mao Zedong 's wife and he entrusted her with leading the  Cultural Revolution . Mao directed her to lead efforts as far as attacking his opposition. She said of herself, "I was Mao's dog. When he said to bite, I bit." [34]

Richard Nixon  wrote about Jiang Qing. "I have never met a more cold, graceless person... Jiang Qing was tough, humorless, totally unfeminine, the ideal prototype of the sexless, fanatical Communist woman". [35]

Margaret MacMillan in her book  Nixon and Mao: The Week That Changed the World  wrote that Jiang was "humorless, self-righteous, capricious and vengeful." [36]

North Korea  practices  state atheism  and belief in  God  is actively discouraged. [37]   Open Doors, an organization based in the United States, has put North Korea at the very top of its list of countries where  Christians  face significant persecution - for 12 years in a row. [38]

Tina Nguyen wrote about North Korea at  Vanity Fair :

The  Finnish  news organization Gbtimes says about North Korea in their article  Laughing at the humorless , "No one really knows anything about North Korea, except that it’s a funny country where hardly anyone ever laughs." [40]

See also:   Atheism and mass murder

The  Christian apologist  Greg Koukl writes in his article  The Real Murderers: Atheism or Christianity? :

Asia Week wrote:

The  New York Times  indicates about the atheist and communist  Fidel Castro  that he was humorless as a child. [43]

The book  Cuban Fiestas  by  Roberto González Echevarría, which was published by Yale University Press, indicates: "Castro is humorless, not like a  Cuban  at all." [44]

Although mere appeals to ridicule is a logical fallacy,  parody  and  satire  certainly have their place.   Because Christianity is so well attested to via evidence and sound argumentation such as the work of  Simon Greenleaf  and other  Christian apologists ,  Christians certainly have liberty to use parody and satire.

In terms of Christian satire, the Christian apologist  JP Holding  features a humorous Christian satire work entitled  You may be a fundamentalist atheist if.... . The biblical  creationist  organization  Answers in Genesis  has used satire to ridicule  evolutionism . [45]

As far as  Christian   internet evangelism , YouTube is a popular online video sharing site that provides a method distributing Christian/creationist videos across the world. The YouTube search engine is the second largest search engine in the world. [46]

The popular Christian YouTube channel,  Shockofgod , which often uses humor to poke fun at the foolishness of atheism, was shut down several times by atheist cyberbullying through false reports, but  he developed counter measures to overcome this problem . [47]  These false reports were not isolated incidents. Atheists, during the time that atheists were more active at YouTube (which was at the peak of the  New Atheism  movement), repeatedly used this deceitful tactic to block out  Christianity  and  creation science  videos. See also:  YouTube atheism

Oswald Chambers declared about atheism: "The real attitude of sin in the heart towards God is that of being without God; it is pride, the worship of myself, that is the great atheistic fact in human life."  [48]  See also:  Atheism and arrogance

It is often said that atheism is a result of demonic deception (see:  Atheism and satanic deception ).

In a 2008 interview,  Dinesh D'Souza  declared:

Thomas More  said, "The Devil, the proud spirit, cannot endure to be mocked.". [50]

Both atheists and Muslims have developed a reputation of being thin-skinned (and for wanting to impose their ideology on others). It has been quipped that "Atheism is the  easiest religion  to  troll ". [51] [52]   Internet trolls often actively pursue trolling atheists due to their penchant of being so proud and  so easily angered . [53]

In 2012,  The Guardian  published an article entitled  Limmy's Show: Confessions of an internet troll  which had the subtitle  There's a witch-hunt going on against internet trolls right now. But, argues Scots funnyman Limmy, randomly goading atheists, jocks and non-existent techno geeks can be fun . [54]   And of course, being thin-skinned is symptomatic of having excessive pride.

Breitbart  journalist Milo Yiannopoulos, a self-described provocateur, indicates "the reason I have a go at atheists is that it's fun. They are so thin-skinned. They are like  libertarians , or...they are like liberal Democrats in the UK or.. feminists  in fact. They are so easy to wind up... They are so touchy." [55]

Most people and cultures take a very dim view of proud people and some cultures are known for actively engaging humbling successful people and/or proud people (Several Anglosphere nations are known for having  tall poppy syndrome  and  Filipinos  are known for having a "crab culture".  Crabs in a bucket of water will pull down crabs trying to escape from the bucket).

Atheist trolls and atheist bullying:

At the same time, atheists are known for trolling others and for engaging in internet  atheist bullying . [56] [57]

"I once wanted to become an atheist but I gave up . . . they have no holidays." -  Henny Youngman [58]