Atheists have given themselves pretentious monikers such as  freethinker , rationalist and " bright " (see also:  Atheism and arrogance  and  Atheism and intelligence  and  Causes of atheism ).

Like many atheists/agnostics, the  new atheist   Richard Dawkins  often arrogantly claims that a person is an adherent of a particular religion purely due to their upbringing and environment. [2]  These same atheists often complain that religion is purely the result of religious indoctrination while ignoring the existence of  atheist indoctrination .

This type fallacious thinking is an example of the  genetic fallacy  and ignores the existence of people changing their religion/worldview based on thoughtful consideration or due to divine intervention. For example, one of Christianity's greatest evangelist was the  Apostle Paul  who was a zealous Jew who persecuted Christians until his experience with  Jesus  on the road to Damascus. In recent years, there are many reports of  Muslims  receiving dreams/visions and becoming Christians. [3]

See also:   Atheism and its retention rate in individuals

In 2012, a  Georgetown University  study was published indicating that only about 30 percent of those who grow up in an  atheist  household remain atheists as adults. [4]

In addition, in atheistic  Communist  China, Christianity  is experiencing explosive growth. [5] [6]   On July 3, 2005, the  New York Times  reported concerning many countries in the former  Soviet Union : "A return to religion in  Romania  and the region's other formerly Communist countries has in many places outrun the speed at which the church can screen and train clergy..." [7]

See:  Collapse of atheism in the former Soviet Union

See also:   Sigmund Freud's view of religion  and  Atheism and health

Psychologist   Sigmund Freud  was a proponent of atheism who argued that theism was detrimental to mental health. [8]   Oxford  Professor  Alister McGrath , author of the book  The Twilight of Atheism ,  stated the following regarding Freud:

Freud is now a fallen idol, the fall having been all the heavier for its postponement. There is now growing awareness of the importance of spirituality in health care, both as a positive factor in relation to well-being and as an issue to which patients have a right. The "Spirituality and Healing in Medicine" conference sponsored by  Harvard  Medical School in 1998 brought reports that 86 percent of Americans as a whole, 99 percent of family physicians, and 94 percent of HMO professionals believe that prayer, meditation, and other spiritual and religious practices exercise a major positive role within the healing process. [8]

Freud remains popular among  postmodern  literary academics, who use his  anti-Christian  pseudoscience as a basis for their own anti-Christianity and moral relativism, even though his theories were disproved decades ago.

Mental hospitals in the  Soviet Union  were used to persecute believers. [9]