Creation Ministries International  in their article on  atheism  declare concerning  atheism and deception :

The  angel  Lucifer (“luminous one”) fell and became Satan (“adversary”) due to his desire to supplant  God . This was Lucifer’s single-minded obsession.

He not only rejected God by attempting to supplant Him, but he urged humans to do likewise. Satan urged  Eve  to choose against God for her own self-fulfilment:

He said to the woman, “Did God actually say, ‘You shall not eat of any tree in the garden’?” And the woman said to the serpent, “We may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden, but God said, ‘You shall not eat of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.’” But the serpent said to the woman, “You will not surely die. For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.” ( Genesis  3:1-5 ESV).

The tactic is clear: firstly, question God’s statements, then, contradict God’s statements and, finally, urge rebellion in seeking equality with God.

This manifests in atheists as

1. Questioning whether there is a God to make statements in the first place, so God did not say anything.

2. Contradicting the statements said to have been spoken by God.

3. Seeking equality with God by replacing God with the self.

This satanic deception appeals strongly to atheists as it bolsters two of their desired delusions: 1) absolute autonomy—being free to do as they please, and 2) the lack of ultimate accountability—there are no eternal consequences for doing as they please. [1]

In a 2008 interview,  Dinesh D'Souza  declared:

See also:   Atheist cults  and  Atheism is a religion  and  Atheist factions

LaVeyan Satanism  is a form of  atheism  which extolls the values of  Satan  which are described in the  Bible .  It is a very  prideful  and  hedonistic  worldview. Some specific characteristics of Leveyan Satanism is that it incorporates egoism, self-deification, the  occult /magic,  Social Darwinism  and  naturalism .  It was found by Anton LeVey in 1966. The Church of Satan was also founded by LeVey.

See also:   Atheism and morality  and  Atheism and deception

The  Apostle John  records  Jesus  making an allusion to the devil and declaring that he is a thief that comes to rob, kill, and destroy. [3]   Jesus also declares the children of the devil want to carry out their father's wishes and that the devil was a liar and a murderer. [4]  As far as the methods used to promulgate atheism,  there is a history of using deception . In addition, atheistic  communist  countries  have used violent means to suppress theism.

Concerning  atheism and mass murder ,  Christian apologist  Gregory Koukl wrote that "the assertion is that religion has caused most of the killing and bloodshed in the world.
There are people who make accusations and assertions that are empirically false. This is one of them." [5] 
Koukl details the number of people killed in various events involving theism and compares them to the much higher tens of millions of people killed under  communist   atheistic  regimes. [5]   It has been estimated that in less than the past 100 years, governments under the banner of  communism  have caused the death of somewhere between 40,472,000 and 259,432,000 human lives. [6]  Dr. R. J. Rummel, professor emeritus of political science at the University of Hawaii, is the scholar who first coined the term democide (death by government). Dr. R. J. Rummel's mid estimate regarding the loss of life due to communism is that communism caused the death of approximately 110,286,000 people between 1917 and 1987. [7]

Koukl summarized by stating:

Richard Dawkins  has attempted to  engage in historical revisionism concerning atheist atrocities and Dawkins was shown to be in gross error .

See also:   Atheism Quotes

Charles Baudelaire  expressed a common belief concerning atheism and satanic deception in his short story  The Generous Gambler  written in 1864:

See also:   Irreligion and superstition  and  Evolution, Liberalism, Atheism, and Irrationality

The notions of  extraterrestrial life  and  UFOlogy  are fast growing  pseudoscientific   religions  which are perpetuated and/or substantially aided by the ideologies of  evolutionists , atheists,  liberals  and other promoters of quackery. [8] [9]  However, the ideologies of  extraterrestrial life ,  UFOlogy ,  exobiology ,  evolution  and  abiogenesis  are anti- biblical  ideas which are not supported by sound  science . [10] [11]

The  agnostic  and  liberal   Carl Sagan , an avid smoker of  marijuana  who claimed that marijuana gave him scientific insights, was a prominent peddler of extraterrestrial life, evolution and other pseudoscientific nonsense.

Astronomer  Dr.  Hugh Ross  states that ninety-nine percent of what people have told him were  UFOs , experienced astronomers can identify as a  star , cluster, or other object in the night sky. The 1 percent of sightings, which he calls residual UFOs, have attracted his attention. [12]  According to Dr. Ross very few astronomers have seen "residual UFOs". [12]

The following  Toledo Blade  newspaper excerpt [12]  summarizes Dr. Ross's findings:

Upon investigation, Dr. Ross consistently found a connection between occult involvement and residual UFO encounters. For example, he said, countries with a high degree of occult activity such as Russia during the Soviet era, France, and certain parts of Brazil also had high percentages of UFO encounters. During Russia's Soviet period when every expression of religion except occult activity had been outlawed, he said, “Russians were seeing UFOs at five to eight times the rate Americans were.

See also:   Irreligion and superstition  and  Christianity and UFOs

Christians  who reject naturalistic explanations of life such as the  theory of evolution  have presented arguments in the field of  Christian apologetics  concerning difficult to explain UFO's being spiritual in nature and not amenable to naturalistic explanation. [13]  Gary Bates of  Creation Ministries International  wrote a book entitled  Alien Intrusion  which gives a biblical Christian perspective on the unscientific notions of extraterrestrial life and UFUlogy. [14]

Lynn Cato, senior bibliographer for the library of Congress, created a 1600 entry on UFO bibliography for the  United States Air Force  Office of Scientific Research. After a two-year investigation, in which she reviewed thousands of documents, Catoe stated:

Prominent UFO researcher John Keel concurred. After surveying the literature on  demonology  Keel declared: [16]