Ben Judah wrote in his article  London’s religious awakening :

The  Barna Group  found that atheists and  agnostics  in America were more likely, than  theists  in America, to look upon the following behaviors as morally acceptable:  illegal drug use; excessive drinking;  sexual relationships outside of marriage ;  abortion ;  cohabitating with someone of opposite sex outside of marriage ; obscene language; gambling;  pornography  and obscene sexual behavior; and engaging in  homosexuality /bisexuality. [3]

A 2013 article entitled  Is Europe proof that intact families don’t really matter? , which cites governmental sources, provides data which shows that the highly  secular European  countries of Sweden, France and Denmark have higher illegitimacy rates than than the more religious European countries of Greece, Switzerland, Italy, Poland and Spain. [4]

See also:   Atheism and marriage  and  Atheist marriages  and  Irreligion and domestic violence

Christian apologist Michael Caputo wrote:

Theodore Beale  declared that according to the 2001  American Religious Identification Survey  (ARIS) "more than half of all atheists and  agnostics  don’t get married." [6]

See also:   Religion and crime reduction  and  Irreligious prison population

As noted above, the data suggests that irreligion is positively correlated with higher illegitimacy rates in societies.

David Kopel wrote for The American Enterprise about illegitimacy and crime:

A large majority of violent criminals come from fatherless homes. A Detroit study found that about 70 percent of juvenile killers did not live with both parents. A study of seriously delinquent girls in California showed 93 percent came from broken homes. A survey of juvenile delinquents in custody in Wisconsin found that fewer than one-sixth grew up in intact families; over two-fifths were illegitimate. Sixty percent of rapists had single-parents (or none). Says one California juvenile counselor, "You find a gang member who comes from a complete nuclear family...I'd like to meet him." [7]

Numerous studies and the historical data indicate that religion, especially Bible believing Christianity, reduces criminality (see:  Religion and crime reduction  and  Irreligious prison population ).