Howard Gardner  at  Harvard University  has identified various distinct intelligences:  interpersonal, intrapersonal, visual–spatial, verbal–linguistic, logical–mathematical, musical–rhythmic, bodily–kinesthetic, and naturalistic. [2]   See:  Theory of multiple intelligences  and  Atheism and the theory of multiple intelligences

Bodily-kinesthetic intelligence  involves intelligence related to body movement, performing actions and physical control. It involves strength in physical movement and fine motor control. [3]   Social science data indicates that atheists are less involved in sports than theists and that religious beliefs tend to increase sports performance (see:  Sports performance: Religious faith vs. atheism ).

Furthermore, there is scientific data indicating that fitness increases  IQ tests  scores. [4]

For additional information please see:

See also:   Atheism and dance

Many religions and cultures have religious  dances  that people take part in. For example,  Wikipedia , a wiki founded by an  atheist  and an  agnostic , has an article entitled "List of Christian dance, electronic, and techno artists". [5]  
Wikipedia has no articles which focus on atheist dance.

In addition, dance is deeply a part of African life. According to the book  African Dance , "Dance is the soul of Africa". [6]  Africa has one of the lowest rates of atheism and  nones  in the world. [7]  See also:  Western atheism and race

Western World  atheism has no tradition of dancing (See also:  Atheism and culture ).

Andrew Brown wrote in  The Guardian  in an article entitled  You can't dance to atheism  :

There aren't any overwhelming  and inspiring  collective atheist rituals...

If I'm right, then liberal, individualistic atheism is impossible as an organising principle of society because any doctrine that actually works to hold society together is indistinguishable from a religion. It needs its rituals. [8]

As far as nontheistic Buddism, an article entitled  A Rare Day of Buddhist Dances  declares:

See also:   African atheism and intelligence

See also:   Sports performance: Religious faith vs. atheism

Wikipedia  was founded by an atheist and agnostic.

As of March 20, 2017, Wikipedia's "list of atheists" article does not a list a single African atheist. [10]

See also:   Sports performance: Religious faith vs. atheism

The largest populations of the irreligious in Africa reside in Southern African countries such as  South Africa ,  Mozambique , and  Botswana . Irreligion in  Ghana  has also been the subject of some study by the atheist Phil Zuckerman. [11]  Irreligiosity is also growing in the Islamic region of North Africa - especially in Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria. None of these areas are world renowned in terms of having long distance running champions.

Kenya  is known for its long distance running champions and its marathon runners are considered to be the best. [12]  The dominant religion in Kenya is Christianity, which is adhered to by approximately 85% of the total population.

See also:   Latino atheism and intelligence

Howard Gardner  at  Harvard University  has identified various distinct intelligences:  interpersonal, intrapersonal, visual–spatial, verbal–linguistic, logical–mathematical, musical–rhythmic, bodily–kinesthetic, and naturalistic. [13]

See also:   Sports performance: Religious faith vs. atheism

Wikipedia  was founded by an atheist and agnostic.

As of March 20, 2017, Wikipedia's "list of atheists" article does not a list a single Latin American atheist. [14]

As far as Latin dance, Roman Catholic settlers merged native culture with their own and incorporated catholic saints and stories to dances. Latino atheists have developed no Latino atheist dances (see:  Atheism and dance ).