The  Battle of the Falkland Islands  was a naval engagement between  British  ships and a  German  cruiser squadron in the first year of  World War I , which ended in victory for the British.

After the British defeat at the  Battle of Coronel , First Sea Lord Sir John Fisher sent the  battlecruisers  HMS  Invincible  and HMS  Inflexible  south under Vice-Admiral Sir John Sturdee.  In addition, the cruisers  Cornwall ,  Kent ,  Bristol , and  Caernarvon  were ordered from their stations in the area to defend the  Falkland Islands , where Fisher believed the Germans were going to strike next.  The light cruiser HMS  Glasgow , veteran of the  Battle of Coronel , and the old battleship  Canopus  were already there.

Fisher had guessed right.  After replenishing his ships off  Chile , Admiral Graf von Spee rounded the  Cape Horn  early in December and came in sight of the Falklands on December 8.  His squadron was comprised of the armored cruisers  Scharnhorst  and  Gneisnau  and the light cruisers  Leipzig ,  Dresden , and  Nurembug .  Thinking the British facilities to be only lightly defended, the German ships attacked.

Sailing towards the islands, the ships came under fire from the  Canopus .  The British  cruisers  entered the area soon after, and von Spee reoriented his ships for a running battle, hoping to out-maneuver the opposing ships.  Once von Spee had committed his forces, the  battlecruisers  emerged from a covering smoke screen.  Von Spee realized he had fallen into a trap, and attempted to escape.  The battlecruisers opened fire at 1255 hours.  Realizing that escape was impossible, von Spee detached his light cruisers, which kept on racing south.  The  Scharnhorst  and  Gneisnau  engaged the battlecruisers, but Sturdee had the edge in speed and gun range, and was able to conduct most of the battle outside the range of the German guns.  Three hours after engaging, the  Scharnhorst  sank with all hands, including Admiral von Spee, and the  Gneisnau  sank an hour and a half later, leaving behind some 200 survivors out of a crew of over 750.

Meanwhile, the  Kent ,  Cornwall , and  Glasgow  continued chasing the other German ships.  The  Kent ’s crew pushed her engines to the limit, and caught up with the  Nuremburg , sinking her at 1930 hours.  The  Cornwall  and  Glasgow  came within range of the  Leipzig  at 2030 hours, and finally sank her at 2323.  Only the  Dresden  escaped.

The battle resulted in the destruction of most of Germany’s remaining commerce raiders, and the rest were eliminated soon afterwards.  On March 14, 1915 the  Dresden  would be caught off the coast of Chile and crippled by the  Kent  and the  Glasgow , forcing her crew to scuttle her.  After that, the German campaign against British trade was carried out exclusively by  U-boats  and auxiliary cruisers.

The battlecruisers  Invincible  and  Inflexible  later saw action in the  Battle of Jutland , the  Invincible  being lost in that engagement.