February 28, 1862

April 8, 1862

City of New Madrid, Missouri Lake County, Tennessee

Western Theater

Joint Operations on the Middle Mississippi River

Union victory

Army of the Mississippi Western Gunboat Flotilla

New Madrid, Island No. 10 garrisons

John Pope Brigadier General, USA Andrew H. Foote Flag Officer, USN

John P. McCown Brigadier General, USA William W. Mackall Brigadier General, USA

6 gunboats 11 mortar rafts

78 Killed: 23 Wounded: 50 Missing: 5

30 Captured: 7,000

With the surrender of Forts Henry and Donelson, Tennessee, and the evacuation of Columbus, Kentucky, Gen. P.G.T. Beauregard, commander of the Confederate Army of the Mississippi, chose Island No. 10, about 60 river miles below Columbus, to be the strongpoint for defending the Mississippi River. Nearby was New Madrid, one of the weak points. Brig. Gen. John Pope, commander of the Union Army of the Mississippi, set out from Commerce, Missouri, to attack New Madrid, on February 28. The force marched overland through swamps, lugging supplies and artillery, reached the New Madrid outskirts on March 3, and laid siege to the city. Brig. Gen. John P. McCown, the garrison commander, defended both New Madrid and Island No. 10 from the fortifications. He launched a sortie, under Brig. Gen. M. Jeff Thompson, Missouri State Guard, against the besiegers and brought up heavy artillery to bombard them. On the 13th, the Confederates bombarded the Yankees to no avail. Since it did not appear possible to defend New Madrid, the Confederate gunboats and troops evacuated to Island No. 10 and Tiptonville. On the 14th, Pope’s army discovered that New Madrid was deserted and moved in to occupy it. A U.S. Navy flotilla, under the command of Flag-Officer Andrew H. Foote, arrived March 15 upstream from Island No. 10. The ironclad  Carondelet  on the night of April 4 passed the Island No. 10 batteries and anchored off New Madrid.  Pittsburgh  followed on the night of April 6. The ironclads helped to overawe the Confederate batteries and guns, enabling Pope’s men to cross the river and block the Confederate escape route. Brig. Gen. William W. Mackall, who replaced McCown, surrendered Island No. 10 on April 8. The Mississippi was now open down to Fort Pillow, Tennessee. ( NPS summary )

Island Number Ten  --  1st Memphis