Bestiality  is the act of a  human being  engaging in sexual relations with an  animal .   In addition to being repulsive and being a sexual  taboo  in societies, bestiality can cause harm to both animals and humans. [1]

Under  Jewish Law , bestiality is punishable by death (see  Old Testament  verses such as Exodus 22:19, Leviticus 18:23, Leviticus 20:15 and Deuteronomy 27:21).

Vice News , a global news channel which broadcasts documentaries about current topics, reported in 2014 about  secular Europe :

See also:  Atheism and bestiality

In 36 of America's states, bestiality is illegal. Alaska is considering a ban. [3]  "Florida Sen. Nan Rich, a Democrat, ... says research has shown that people who molest animals are likely to rape or  molest  people." [3]

According to the San Francisco Chronicle:

-  A report in the Journal of Forensic Psychiatry revealed that 20 percent of children who sexually abuse other children also have histories of sexually abusing animals.

-  A Utah State University study showed 37 percent of sexually violent juvenile offenders have a history of animal sexual assault. [4]

A study found that "Psychiatric patients were found to have a statistically significant higher prevalence rate (55%) of bestiality than the control groups (10% and 15% respectively)." [5]

See also:   Atheism and bestiality

See also:   Bestiality and secular Europe  and  Secular Europe

From a global perspective,  Europe  is more secular/atheistic than the rest of the world although it does have a considerable amount of religious immigrants who have higher birth rates (see:  Atheist population  and  Global atheism ).

In areas of the  Western World  where there is a significant amount of  atheists  and evolutionary belief, there have been notable problems related to bestiality (see:  Bestiality and various geographic areas ).

A 2015  Jerusalem Post  article indicates " Copenhagen  has for long been the bestiality capital of Europe and has attracted many tourists mainly visiting to have sex with animals. Legislation against this practice was only enacted this year." [7]

See also:

The first so called "bestiality/zoophile rights" group, called Equality for All, has its roots in secular Europe and formed in the '90s. [9]  It is located in the Czech Republic. According to a 2010 Eurobarometer poll, 16% of Czech citizens responded that "they believe there is a God"  which the lowest rate among the countries of the European Union. [10]

In 2005, the Pew Forum reported:

See also:  PZ Myers on bestiality  and  Atheism, academia and bestiality

PZ Myers  wrote about bestiality:

A Christian commented on Myers's statement:

When I sent Myers an email asking him to clarify what "specific conditions" would make bestiality morally acceptable in his opinion, he declined to address my email and my second article on the subject. There is really only one likely scenario in which it seems Myers would accept bestiality, also known as zoophilia, and that is if it is apparent that the animal is not being harmed and if it is demonstrating some kind of approval, enjoyment or "consent" in the act. The problem for Myers here is quite simple. If nothing must be held sacred, then why should bestiality be considered acceptable only under certain conditions and not always? Why should animal rights be an issue if animal rights are not sacred? These are logical contradictions he needs to address. What is happening here is that Myers is revealing in his quote that he does in fact believe that some boundaries must be held sacred. [12]

Myers also wrote, "...over the years I’ve become something of a connoisseur of  cephalopod  porn…and I’m sorry to say that 99% of it is crap, expressing a total lack of comprehension of why cephalopods have sensual appeal." [15]

On May 22, 2012, PZ Myers specifies under what conditions he thinks the practice of bestiality would be acceptable. [16]

On November 14, 2014, an atheist animal trainer wrote in response:

>> THEN sex with an animal is ethical...

PZ Myers possesses numerous character flaws that make him ill-suited as an A/S/humanism spokesperson and representative: his explosive temper; his violence-tinged threats; his foul language; his preference for personal insults over reasoned debate; his propensity to smear and slander any & all who oppose him;..his willingness to abandon skepticism and science to serve the pomo constructs of radical feminism and social justice warriordom.

Of all these, nothing is more odious, repulsive, or damaging to the reputation of A/S & humanist activism, than Myers’ condoning of bestiality. [17]

On November 17, 2014, atheist  Michael Nugent  wrote:

See also:   Bestiality and Britain  and  Christopher Hitchens on bestiality

Christopher Hitchens  is one of the principal leaders of the  New Atheism  movement. At the end of the  Christian apologist  Dr.  William Lane Craig  vs. atheist Christopher Hitchens debate there was an audience question and answer period (see:  VIDEO ). [20]   The first audience member to ask a question twice asked  Christopher Hitchens  to label bestiality as an immoral act, but he refused to do so. [21] [22]  Dr. Craig said the question posed to Hitchens was a good one and it helped illustrate that atheism cannot offer objective moral standards (see:  Atheism and morality ). [23]

On August 12, 2012, an article entitled  Atheism: A religion of degenerates  declared:

The Bible teaches that bestiality is a perversion and, under the Old Testament Jewish Law, punishable by death (Exodus 22:19, Leviticus 18:23, Leviticus 20:15 and Deuteronomy 27:21). I feel sorry for all the sheep and little dogs who have been raped by depraved atheists because prominent atheists have refused to condemn bestiality. Atheism has no basis for  objective morality  so it is not surprising that atheist degenerates refuse to condemn bestiality. [24]

See also:   Social effects of the theory of evolution

Since  World War II  a majority of the most prominent and vocal defenders of the  evolutionary position  which employs  methodological naturalism  have been  atheists . [26]

In July of 2000,  Creation Ministries International  reported:

The research survey of 1535 people, conducted by the Australian National University, revealed that belief in evolution is associated with moral permissiveness. Darwin himself apparently feared that belief in evolution by the common man would lead to social decay. The survey showed that people who believed in evolution were more likely to be in favour of premarital sex than those who rejected Darwin’s theory. Another issue which highlighted the contrast between the effect of evolutionary ideas and that of biblical principles was that Darwinians were reported to be ‘especially tolerant’ of  abortion .

In identifying the primary factors determining these differences in community attitudes, the author of the research report, Dr Jonathan Kelley, said: ‘The single most important influence after church attendance is the theory of evolution.’ [27]

See also:   Evolutionary belief and bestiality  and  Evolutionary belief and sexual immorality

The pro- evolution  magazine the  Scientific American  speciously made this unwarranted speculation via their blog:

In any event, philosophical questions aside, I simply find it astounding — and incredibly fascinating from an  evolutionary  perspective — that so many people (as much as a full percent of the general population) are certifiable zoophiles. And scientific researchers appear to be slowly conceding that zoophilia may be a genuine human sexual orientation. [28]

See also:   Denmark and bestiality  and  Evolutionary belief and bestiality

Denmark  has the highest rate of belief in evolution in the  Western World . [31]  In addition, in 2005  Denmark  was ranked the third most atheistic country in the world and the website adherents.com reported that in 2005 43 - 80% of Danes were  agnostics /atheists/non-believers in God. [32]

A 2006 article entitled  Animal bordellos draw Norweigans  the Norway news website Aftenposten reported:

On the internet Danish animal owners advertise openly that they offer sex with animals, without intervention from police or other authorities, Danish newspaper 24timer reports. [33]

As noted above, in 2014, according to Danish journalist Margit Shabanzahen, a Danish man who ran a business catering to people who have sex with horses said that he had buses of people arriving at his business. [34]

In October of 2014,  Mashable  reported: "Banning sex with animals seems like a pretty obvious move in any civilized society, but it took a rise in bestiality tourism for Denmark to make a move." [35]

In 2015, Denmark passed a law banning  bestiality. [36]

Mashable reported, "Members of libertarian party Liberal Alliance and Denmark's Ethical Council for Animals, an independent advisory council, among other groups, voiced opposition to the law. [37]

According the  CBS News , the bestiality ban passed in a narrow vote. [38]

A 2015  Jerusalem Post  article indicates "Copenhagen has for long been the bestiality capital of Europe and has attracted many tourists mainly visiting to have sex with animals. Legislation against this practice was only enacted this year." [39]

See also:   Bestiality and Sweden  and  Evolutionary belief and bestiality  and  Sexual immorality and Sweden

Sweden  is one of the most atheistic counties in the world and the website adherents.com reported that in 2005 46 - 85% of Swedes were  agnostics /atheists/non-believers in God. [43]  As noted above, Sweden also has the 3rd highest rate of belief in evolution as far as  Western World  nations (see:  Evolutionary belief and bestiality ). [44]

In 2005,  LifeSiteNews  reported in an article entitled  Bestiality on the Rise in Sexually Libertine Sweden :

The Swedish Animal Welfare Agency collected its information based on responses received from 1,600 questionnaires sent to veterinarians, animal welfare inspectors and police agencies across the country. In the period 2000 to 2004, 119 cases of bestiality were documented, compared to just three known cases in the 1970s, 17 in the 1980s and 70 in the 1990s.

The author of the report indicated that the numbers may not correctly reflect the real problem. Katarina Andersson, said that the rise in documented cases did not necessarily mean that there was a de facto increase.

“We know that there must be cases that have not been documented,” she said, adding that people have also become more aware of the problem in recent years and are therefore more likely to report suspected cases to the authorities. [45]

On April 26, 2001, in an article entitled  Swedes have more and more animal sex  the Swedish news website Nettavision reported:

The estimate was presented by Svenska Veterinärforbundet, the Swedish veterinary organization, and it is now trying to make the authorities and the public more aware of animals’ suffering. The organization claim the problem has increased during the last couple of years, even if most people are unaware of it.

“We have seen an increase since 1999 when child pornography became illegal,” said Johan Beck-Friis. “It appears, in other words, as there are some people who have replaced children with animals. In both circumstances, it is sex with defenceless individuals.” [46]

See also:  Sexual immorality and Sweden

On November 11, 2008, the Swedish news website  The Local  reported:

The group, consisting of an estimated thirty people, is headed by a 45-year-old father of two, Expressen reports.

The unmarried former managing director is also moderator of a large internet animal sex forum and has a number of dogs and horses on his farm in southern Sweden.

Having infiltrated the network over a period of several months, Expressen eventually confronted the 45-year-old over his alleged mistreatment of animals. [47]

In 2014, bestiality was made illegal in Sweden. [49]

See also:   Sexual immorality and Sweden

On May 5, 2011 the Swedish news website  The Local  reported in an article entitled  Swedish women hit harder by  STD  rise :

According to new statistics from the Swedish Institute for Communicable Disease Control (Smittskyddsinstitutet), there was a 38 percent rise in reported cases of the two diseases among Swedes in general.

Worst hit, however, are young women between 15 and 24, where the number of cases increased by 57 percent. [50]

See also:   Sexual immorality and Sweden

In November 0f 2008, the  UK  newspaper  The Times  reported:

The unmasking this week of an animal sex network by the Stockholm newspaper Expressen has again highlighted the issue. Members of parliament are urging a tightening of the laws (bestiality was decriminalised along with  homosexuality  in 1944) but the government is resisting the pressure...

Sweden has had a pioneering approach towards sex, at least since the 1960s when critically acclaimed films such as I am Curious Yellow depicted the society's free-wheeling attitudes. The country was one of the first to shed the stigma of single motherhood and, while Swedes talk less about sexual matters nowadays than 30 years ago, they are still pushing back the boundaries... Legal limits are set mainly on the commercial exploitation of sex: thus, while prostitution is technically legal, customers are seen as offenders who exploit and abuse women. Cameras have been set up near the entrances of brothels and clients leaving the premises can be fined on the spot.

But bestiality and the whole seedy sub-culture surrounding it is straining Swedish tolerance to bursting point. Religious Swedes say it violates a fundamental taboo: a passage from Leviticus 18 states: “And you shall not lie with any beast and defile yourself with it, neither shall any woman give herself a beast to lie with it: it is a perversion." In the  Middle Ages , men were typically burned to death for having sex with animals. Most countries nowadays either outlaw the practice entirely (most states in the US) or prosecute penetrative sex with animals (Britain). Sweden, though, has not taken a religion-based stance. Rather, it seems to accept the idea that sex with animals can be in some way consensual. If it causes injury to the animal it can be prosecuted, although in practice only two out of the 115 cases registered have ever been investigated. [51]

See also:   Bestiality and Germany

Germany  has the highest rates of belief in  evolution  in the  world . [53]  In 2005, it was estimated that 70% of Germans believed in evolution. [54]  In addition, Germany is one of the most atheistic countries in the world and the website adherents.com reports that 41-49% of Germans are  agnostics /atheists/non-believers in God. [55]

A July 1, 2013,  Daily Mail  article on bestiality and Germany declared:

Madeleine Martin told the Frankfurter Rundschau that current laws were not protecting animals from predatory zoophiles who are increasingly able to turn to bestiality as a 'lifestyle choice'.

She highlighted one case where a farmer in the Gross-Gerau region of southwest Germany, noticed his once friendly flock of sheep were beginning to shy away from human contact....

There are even 'erotic zoos' which people can visit to abuse animals ranging from llamas to goats. [56]

In 2012,  Russia Today  reported that is estimated that there are approximately 100,000 zoophiles in Germany (a zoophile is someone who is sexually attracted to animals).  [57]

In July of 2013, Tom Miller reported:

Move over, Japan and Thailand, there is a new leader going into the weird sex stuff clubhouse. To put it SAT terms, Germany is to weird sex stuff what Florida is to weird felonies/ prescription pill abuse. Yeah, that odd.

Per the Daily Mail, there is growing concern in Deutschland that bestiality is becoming a popular attraction in the nation's brothels. [58]

It was reported in July of 2013 that due to a sharp rise of bestiality in Germany and websites promoting it, German authorities had planned to reinstall an old law banning sex with animals. [59]

On February 13, 2013,  The Local  reported:

On Thursday night, there was a screening of a bestiality documentary “Coming Soon” in Berlin. It was followed by a discussion on leading a zoophilic lifestyle. [60]

In 2012, the Germany government tightened its bestiality law and now imposes a fine for engaging in bestiality with a €25,000 maximum fine. Bestiality had been stricken from Germany’s penal code in 1969 and since then had merel been against the law if “significant harm” is inflicted on the animal. [61]

See also:   Netherlands and bestiality  and  Evolutionary belief and bestiality

In 2005, the  Netherlands  was ranked the 13th most atheistic country in the world and the website adherents.com reported that in 2005 39 - 44%% of the Dutch are agnostics/atheists/non-believers in God. [63]  The Netherlands also has the 11th highest rate of belief in evolution as far as  Western World  nations (see:  Evolutionary belief and bestiality ). [64]

In February of 2010, the UK news website  Metro  reported:

In 2010, the Netherlands banned bestiality. [66]

See also:   Bestiality and Britain  and  Britain and morality

In 2011, in an article entitled  Godless Britain  Shmuley Boteach reported in the  Wall Street Journal :

While 92% of Americans believe in God, only 35% in Britain do and 43% say they have no religion, according to Britain's National Centre for Social Research. The number of people who affiliate themselves with the Church of England was 23% of the population in 2009 from 40% in 1983. In truth though, if Britain's Christian tradition is dying out, the leaders of the faith have only themselves to blame, for perpetuating the country's highly centralized religious structure. [68]

Between 1983 and 1993 more than 160 horses were sexually mutilated and stabbed in Britain. [69]  British police and animal experts have put the blame on fertility cults, rival horse owners and  sadists  for the attacks. [70]

The abstract of the 2008  Journal of Small Animal Practice  article entitled  Battered pets’: sexual abuse  indicated: "A study of non-accidental injury in small animals in the UK, based on responses from a random sample of small animal practitioners, identified 6 per cent of the 448 reported cases as being sexual in nature". [71]

See also:   Britain and morality

On  May 26, 2005,  LifeSiteNews  reported:

“A programme about sex with animals? Yes, it’s potentially possible,” said Ofcom deputy chairman, Richard Hooper. “It all comes down to context.” Mr. Hooper may have been thinking of a channel 4 documentary on bestiality, Animal Passions, which was aired last year. According to a Media Guardian article that particular documentary received seventy-five complaints at the time, from viewers who were concerned that it “normalized bestiality”.

Mr. Hooper’s statement serves to confirm what pro-family activists have long prophesied. That is, this new age of sexual libertarianism, which, amongst other things, allows for and normalizes homosexuality, will quickly become an age of ‘no-holds-barred’ in regards to sexual deviation unless a return to a proper understanding of sexuality is initiated. [72]

On September 19, 2011, the British newspaper  The  Guardian  published a favorable article on bestiality entitled  Improbable research: bestiality saddled with the wrong image  which mentioned a man's "long courtship" with a horse and also his two "mare-wives". [73]

See also:   Britain and morality  and  Liberalism and bestiality

In August of 2011 the British newspaper the Daily Mail ran a story entitled  The explicit art that shows bestiality with a  goat  just yards from The Ritz  which declared:

Hotel guests were said to have been disgusted after seeing the image by the late British artist Robert Lenkiewicz – which depicts bestiality with a goat.

It was displayed on a revolving plinth in the front window of the Clarendon Fine Art gallery, around the corner from the five-star hotel in Piccadilly.

The picture – which is owned by a private collector and is expected to sell for around £30,000 – was still on display yesterday, although last night the gallery said it had been removed.
 [75]

See also:   Britain and morality

In August of 2010, it was reported by  that there was sharp increase in sexually transmitted infections in  United Kingdom  with almost half a million new cases last year. [76]

See also:   Bestiality and Australia

In a June 14, 2012 article entitled  Infanticide and bestiality advocate given Australia’s highest civic award , LifeSiteNews reported:

Singer was presented with the award, which is the greatest civic honour in Australia and given for “merit of the highest degree in service to Australia or humanity at large,” on Monday at the 2012 Queen’s Birthday honours. It was granted for his “eminent service to philosophy and bioethics as a leader of public debate and communicator of ideas in the areas of global poverty, animal welfare and the human condition.” [78]

Peter Singer is an Australian  atheist   philosopher  and  evolutionist .  See also:  Evolutionary belief and bestiality

According to the  Sydney Morning Herald :

Religion does not play a central part in the lives of many Australians: 48 per cent of Australians surveyed said they did not partake in personal prayer and 52 per cent said they rarely attended a place of worship for religious reasons. [79]

A 2004 study by Pippa Norris and Ronald Inglehart found that 25% of Australians do not believe in  God/gods. [80]  In 2006 study was done by Monash University, the Australian Catholic University and the Christian Research Association which found that 52 per cent of Australians born between 1976 and 1990 have no belief in God/gods. [81]

In 2009, Australia's newspaper  The Age  reported:

Australians are more religious than we might have thought - 68 per cent of us believe in God or a universal spirit, and 50 per cent say religion is important or very important in their lives.

But atheists and agnostics also had a strong showing in the national survey of 1000 respondents, which was taken early this week.

Almost one in four Australians (24 per cent) do not believe in either God or a universal spirit, and 7 per cent are not sure or say they  don't know .

Nearly a quarter of us believe the biblical account of human origins over the Darwinian account. Forty-two per cent of people believe in a wholly scientific explanation for the origins of life and 32 per cent believe in an evolutionary process  guided by God . [82]

Australia's  Alternative Law Journal  reported:

Neither the SA parliament nor courts have engaged with the argument, most prominently promoted by ethicist Peter Singer, that sexual activity between animals and humans is not necessarily exploitative or abusive of the animal and not an affront to an individual’s humanity, as human beings are also animals. The comparison with the penalty for incest demonstrates the seriousness with which the parliament views bestiality. Until now, the judicial attitude to the offence was untested. [83]

On September 15, 2015, the  Sydney Morning Herald  reported:

The man is alleged to have cycled up to two young women walking their dogs through an enclosed bicycle path in the western Sydney suburb of Greystanes last month.

Police will allege he exposed himself to both and assaulted one of their dogs. The pair fled as the man allegedly began to turn and attack another animal.

The 39-year-old man has been charged with bestiality and committing an act of indecency. [84]

In 2014, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation reported that Kathleen Modystack, an Australian woman, convicted of bestiality in 2012 has been deregistered as a nurse and banned from working in the nursing field for three years. [85]   The Nursing and Midwifery Board (NMB) won its legal case with the Health Practitioners Tribunal (HPT) after accusing Kathleen Modystack of damaging the nursing profession's reputation. [86]

In 2013, an Australian television station put up a bestiality billboard. [87]

See also:   Irreligious Finland and bestiality

According to a 2010 Eurobarometer Poll, 33% of  Finnish  citizens "believe there is a God". (In 2005, the figure was 41%). [89]

A Finnish news website reported in July of 2015:

As the law currently stands in Finland, a person can engage in sexual intercourse with an animal as long as it cannot be proved that the animal has been treated too roughly or cruelly or that the act has caused unnecessary pain and suffering.

...Finland legalised bestiality in 1971, following in the footsteps of other European countries. It was thought that criminalising the act was not the right way to deal with people who are likely to suffer from mental illness or who are simply lonely. [90]

See also:  Irreligious Finland and loneliness

Minna Ruotsalo, chief inspector at Finland's Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, said concerning bestiality, "some persons that engage in the activity have contacted us saying that they would be concerned were the act to be criminalised in Finland". [91]

See also:   Wikipedia on bestiality  and  liberal  and  Leftist roots of Wikipedia  and  Atheism and morality

The  Wikipedia  project was initiated by  atheist   Jimmy Wales  and the  agnostic   philosophy   professor   Larry Sanger  on January 15, 2001. [92]  An irony of internet history is that Jimmy Wales, despite being an atheist, refers to himself as Wikipedia's "spiritual leader". [93]  Despite its official "neutrality policy,"  Wikipedia has a strong liberal bias.

As of September 22, 2011,  Wikipedia 's article on zoophilia/bestiality has an entire section on "arguments for zoophilia" plus pictures depicting zoophilia as well as a section on "arguments against zoophilia".  No worthwhile encyclopedia in existence has an article on zoophilia/bestiality with an entire section on "arguments for zoophilia" plus pictures depicting zoophilia. In addition, as of September 24, 2011, Wikipedia has a "Zoophilia and the law" article which has a section on the impact of zoophilia laws where 6 alleged negative impacts of zoophilia laws are given, but no positive impacts of the laws are given.

See also:   Homosexuality and bestiality

Homosexual activist Frank Kameny is a fervent  atheist . [94] [95]

On Jun 04, 2008,  LifeSiteNews  wrote:

Kameny, 83, has had a long career advocating the removal of any restrictions on human acts long considered by sane societies as obscene, dangerous, and disordered...

Kameny describes his mission as "Americanism in action" by advocating bestiality and encouraging the saturation of American culture with what he calls "more and better and harder-core pornography."

According to  Americans for Truth about Homosexuality  (AFTAH), Kameny wrote an e-mail to them saying that while he was personally opposed to bestiality, he found it an otherwise "harmless" quirk, so long as it was consensual with the animal involved.

"Bestiality is not my thing," Kameny wrote. "But it seems to be a harmless foible or idiosyncrasy of some people. So, as long as the animal doesn’t mind (and the animal rarely does), I don’t mind, and I don’t see why anyone else should." [96]

See also:   Evolutionary belief and bestiality  and  Homosexuality and bestiality  and  Liberalism and bestiality

France  has the 8th highest rate of atheism in the world with 43 - 54% of the population being atheists/agnostics/non-believers in God. [101]  In addition, France has the 4rth highest belief in evolution in the  Western World . [102]

On June 24, 2010 the website  Gawker  wrote in an article entitled  This Gay Bestiality Ad Is Crazy Even For France  wrote:

So we see a mountain lion made to look like a man shaving his face, but instead of shaving cream, he uses Orangina, the sticky sweet carbonated beverage that is the European equivalent of Sunkist. That's strange enough, but what sends this over the edge is that his hunky boyfriend comes over and feels how smooth his shave is at the last second. [103]

The French atheist  Marquis de Sade  wrote sadomasochistic novels which featured rape, bestiality and necrophilia. During a portion of his life, the Marquis de Sade had problems maintaining a healthy weight and he was grotesquely  obese  (see:  Atheism and obesity ).  [104]

See also:

See also:   Atheism and necrobestiality

The abstract of a 2014 peer-reviewed study in the journal  Plos One  reported:

In their book  Answering the New Atheism: Dismantling Dawkins' Case Against God , Scott Hahn and Benjamin Wiker indicate about  Richard Dawkins :

Given that both he and Singer work according to the same principle — that species distinctions are morally insignificant and that morality must therefore be determined by the capacity to feel pleasure and pain — Dawkins cannot offer a good reason that Singer's affirmation of bestiality is illicit. [106]

Dawkins says in his ten commandments: “Enjoy your own sex life (so long as it damages nobody else) and leave others to enjoy theirs in private whatever their inclinations, which are none of your business;” “Do not discriminate or oppress on the basis of sex, race or (as far as possible) species.” [107]

See also:   Joseph Stalin's ape-men experiments

In an article entitled  Stalin’s ape-man Superwarriors   Creation Ministries International  declares:

The report claimed that Stalin ordered Russia’s top animal-breeding scientist, Ilya Ivanov, to use his skills to produce a super warrior. Stalin is said to have told Ivanov, ‘I want a new invincible human being, insensitive to pain, resistant and indifferent about the quality of food they eat.’ In 1926, the Politburo in Moscow passed this request to build a ‘living war machine’ on to the Academy of Sciences, who engaged Ivanov and sent him to West Africa with many thousands of dollars to conduct experiments in impregnating chimpanzees by artificial insemination. In the USSR, a centre was set up in Georgia, Stalin’s birthplace, for the ‘apes’ to be raised.

Ivanov’s experiments in Africa were a total failure. Further experiments in Georgia to use monkey sperm in human volunteers also failed. Ivanov was now in disgrace. For his expensive failure, he was sentenced to five years’ jail, commuted to five years’ exile in Kazakhstan, where he died in 1932, aged 61. [108]

See also:   Liberalism and bestiality

The  atheist  philosopher  Peter Singer  defends the practice of bestiality (as well as  abortion , infanticide and  euthanasia ).  Despite holding these immoral views the  liberal  and pro- evolution  academic establishment rewarded his views with a bioethics chair at  Princeton University . [109]  Peter Singer was installed as the Ira W. DeCamp Professor of Bioethics at the University Center for Human Values at Princeton University in 1999 and in 2006 it was reported that he still worked part-time in that capacity. [110]  See also:  Atheism and bestiality

John Wiener in his essay entitled  Is Princeton too liberal?  wrote:

How liberal is the Princeton faculty? The Center for Democratic Politics has collected and published the 2004 campaign contribution data on its website www.opensecrets.org. Now we know: Princeton employees gave $252,000 to the Democrats in 2004 and only $22,000 to the Republicans. That's 92 percent Democratic. The figure is for "employees," which of course includes staff as well as faculty. It's not perfect, but it's the best we have.

Princeton is not very different from other elite colleges and universities — Yale contributions were 93 percent Democratic, Columbia was 90 percent and Harvard was on top at 96 percent Democratic. [111]

Joe Carter's  First Things  article entitled  The Dangerous Mind  declares concerning Peter  Singer declared:

In 2006, it was also reported that Singer worked part-time as Laureate Professor at the University of Melbourne in the Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics since 2005. [113]

In 2005, four legislators in the liberal state of  Massachusetts  tried to soften it bestiality laws. [114]

See also:   Homosexuality and bestiality

Every society has its tragic perverts. What makes this new generation of bestialists different is their political and cultural savvy. They have latched onto the language of “rights” and are trying to identify themselves with other sexual minorities.  Michele Bachmann  must be overjoyed. This somewhat validates the Christian Right’s prediction that the campaign for gay equality has accidentally opened the door to some far freakier demands.

The push for the normalisaton of bestiality is astonishing for its candour...

Like other bestialists, Brenner cleverly adopts the language of minority persecution in defence of his “relationship”. It puts the reader onto a back foot, forcing them to justify their own “prejudice”. Another activist, Cody Beck, compares talking about his attraction to dogs and horses to a gay teenager coming out....

Of course, there is a big difference between gay marriage and zoophilia. But what Beck’s perverse logic illustrates is how the gay rights movement has moved American society to a point where it at least has to consider legalising things like polygamy and bestiality. Take this article by feminist author Victoria Bekiempis in The Guardian. It’s a cogent, intelligent summation of the arguments for and against bestiality. As such, its tone is simply astonishing. At no point does Bekiempis simply write what the sane reader is actually thinking, ie, “People who rape their guide dogs should be flogged within an inch of their lives.” While Bekiempis disagrees with the zoophiles, by taking them so seriously she elevates them. [115]

See also:  Liberal American entertainment industry and bestiality  and  Liberal bias

The mainstream  American  media has a liberal bias (see:  Liberal bias ).

On August 6, 2008  LifeSiteNews  reported:

According to the PTC study, some of the once-taboo-for-TV sexual behaviors that are now found on prime time television include threesomes, partner swapping, pedophilia, necrophilia, bestiality, and sex with prostitutes...

In 46 hours of programming,  NBC  contained only one reference to marital sex, but 11 references to non-marital sex and one reference to adultery were made.

References to incest, pedophilia, partner swapping, prostitution, threesomes, transsexuals/transvestites,  bestiality , and necrophilia combined outnumbered references to sex in marriage on NBC by a ratio of 27 to 1. [117]

See also:   Occupy Wall Street and bestiality chant

Bestiality  is the act of engaging in sexual relations with an animal.  A crowd at Occupy Wall Street was led to repeat various chants which included a chant involving bestiality and the incident was videotaped. [118]

Below is an excerpt of the chant:

On July 7, 2008  Cybercast News  reported:

Mary Clossey filed her report with the Newton, Mass. Police Department Friday after learning that her 15-year-old son had been assigned to read 'The Perks of Being a Wallflower" by Stephen Chbosky.

Internet bookseller Amazon.com describes the book as the "funny, touching, memorable first novel from Stephen Chbosky," and praised it for "the resounding accuracy with which the author captures the voice of a boy teetering on the brink of adulthood." But Clossey takes a different view of the 213-page novel.

"I objected to it because of the different kinds of sex," she said. "We have sodomy, we have bestiality, sex with the dog, it's all in here." [120]

LifeSiteNews  reported on February 13, 2008:

On May 9, 2011, OneNewNow reported:

Americans for Truth About Homosexuality  (AFTAH) founder Peter LaBarbera visited the  University of Chicago  upon learning that the school had funded an exhibit called the "Leather Library," which featured books and magazines about sadomasochism.

"Incredibly, the university has now allowed an official student group dedicated to sadomasochism. This [is a] consensually violent, degrading sex fetish, and the university funded this Leather Library exhibit," he laments.

Peter LaBarbera  (AFTAH) LaBarbera took pictures of some of the material....available to young people at the exhibit, which displayed themes of incest and pedophilia.

"There were bestiality books there, and even one that is too disgusting to mention -- a form of pornography which is the most vile in the world, eroticizing so-called 'snuff' films, where a person is murdered in the process of pornography," the AFTAH president reports.

He says he has learned that once the floodgates to  homosexuality  are opened, little can be done to stop what follows. And he concludes that this exhibit, for which developers hope to raise enough money to take nationwide, is an example of that. [123]

On June 16, 2008  LifeSiteNews  reported in a story entitled H omosexual and Abortion Activist Judge Caught with Bestiality on Website :

Alex Kozinski, chief judge of the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, suspended for 48 hours a trial he was presiding over after the prosecutor petitioned for time to investigate "a potential conflict of interest concerning the court having a…sexually explicit website with similar material to what is on trial here." [126]

On July 8, 2009, LifeSiteNews reported:

The images were discovered last year as Kozinski presided over an obscenity trial, from which the judge recused himself after the prosecutor in the case petitioned for time to investigate "a potential conflict of interest concerning the court having a ... sexually explicit website with similar material to what is on trial here." [127]

LifeSiteNews  reported on February 04, 2010:

According to reports originating from Cordoba, in the Spanish region of Andalucia, the EpC program there is going even further—and teaching bestiality.

The organization "Cordoba Educates in Freedom," a group opposed to EpC, is accusing the EpC program at the Maimonides Institute for Secondary Education of teaching 13-14 year olds that "nature gives us sex so that we can use it with another girl, another boy, or with an animal," according to a report by Professionals for Ethics, another anti-EpC group. [129]

See also:   Liberal Christianity and bestiality

Liberal Christianity  or  Theological Modernism  is a broad term which basically refers to a movement within American Protestant denominations to stress the social role of Christianity, as in the  Social Gospel  of the early 20th century. This movement is characterized by a lack of emphasis on or denial of the plenary Divine inspiration and authority of the Bible, and commitment to doctrinal purity. Prevalent Biblical themes such as repentance from personal moral sin, hell and damnation for those who reject Christ, His blood atonement and His future literal reign are minimized, or militated against. In 1937, H. Richard Niebuhr summarized their basic gospel message as preaching that "A God without wrath brought men without sin into a kingdom without judgment through the ministrations of a Christ without a Cross." [130] [131]

Bible.org declared about  liberal Christianity and bestiality :

...liberals underestimate the moral and spiritual depravity of humanity. The liberal credo is that human beings are basically good, and it is on this basis that liberals reject much of the biblical revelation. For example, the doctrine of eternal punishment makes no sense if human beings are basically good — but it makes fine sense if fallen human beings are incorrigibly depraved and rebellious against God in their hearts apart from the transforming grace of God in Jesus Christ. God’s command to destroy the Canaanites makes a lot of sense when you realize that the whole culture was permeated with such gross evils as  bestiality  and child sacrifice (which is also why the Israelites were repeatedly warned not to engage in such practices). [132]