William H. Ichter,  known as  Bill Ichter  (born December 1925), [1]  is a  Southern Baptist  clergyman who for thirty-five years was a missionary to  Brazil  under auspices of the Foreign Mission Board of the  Southern Baptist Convention .

Ichter was born as one of two sons to Harold Lester Ichter (1903-1993) and the former Harriet Ellen Tremayne in Nanticoke, a small  coal -mining community in Berks County near Reading in southeastern  Pennsylvania . [2]  Harold Ichter was an employee of the  United States Postal Service  and the Pennsylvania  National Guard ; the family was hardly impacted by the  Great Depression  because of the father's two paychecks. With the attack on  Pearl Harbor  in 1941, the senior Ichter was sent to  Alexandria ,  Louisiana , to be an umpire for the war games at nearby  United States Army  camps. As a result of this move, the younger Ichter came into contact with Southern Baptists. He graduated a semester early in 1943 from Bolton High School in Alexandria. [2]

He served from February 1944 to June 1946 as a corporal in  General   George S. Patton, Jr. 's Third Army infantry in  Europe [2]  and participated in various  musical  groups with the Allied Army of Occupation. His book,  Who Me, God?  reflects in part on his military experiences. [3]  Harold Ichter was mobilized as part of the 28th Infantry Division but failed his overseas physical because of  arthritis  and was instead sent to administer  prisoner of war  camps at Camp Livingston in Louisiana and other facilities in  Texas  and  New Mexico , while son Bill sailed overseas from Fort Dix,  New Jersey , and arrived in  England  on February 6, 1945, soon sent thereafter into Patton's army. After the war, he toured  Rome  as part of an Army choir and saw first-hand the devastation and rampant poverty of postwar  Italy . [2]

In 1949, Bill Ichter with assistance from the G.I. Bill of Rights completed his bachelor's degree from Baptist-affiliated Louisiana College in  Pineville  with majors in  Bible  and music. Ichter made his profession of faith in  Jesus Christ  at a campus chapel service preached by  W. O. Vaught , who from 1945 to 1983 was the pastor of the Immanuel Baptist Church in  Little Rock ,  Arkansas . While serving in the music ministry of the Istrouma Baptist Church in  Baton Rouge , Ichter felt the divine call for mission work. He obtained a master's degree from  Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in  New Orleans  and continued to serve area churches. In 1956, at his appointment ceremony in  Richmond ,  Virginia , Ichter met  Billy Graham , who was holding a crusade that week in Richmond and spoke to each new missionary. In 1964, Ichter compiled a crusade hymnal and composed one song himself. In 1974, Ichter led the 11,500-voice Graham Crusade Choir during the evangelist's appearance in  Rio de Janeiro . [3]

Ichter returned to Louisiana from Brazil in 1990. In recent years, he has resided in  Minden  in  Webster Parish in northwestern Louisiana, where he is active in the First Baptist Church and has been a hospital chaplain. [2]  On  Veterans Day  2014, his adopted city of Minden observed "Bill Ichter Day," proclaimed by Mayor Marvin T. "Tommy" Davis. [4]  In the ceremony, Ichter received from the French consul the Legion of Honor medal, the highest award by that nation. He had also won a  Bronze Star  during the war. His name was the first to be placed on the Wall of Honor at Minden's Veterans Flag Memorial. The South Webster  Chamber of Commerce  awarded him  its "Lifetime Achievement Award." [3]

Ichter and his wife, the former Jerry Catron (born June 1930), wed in 1949 and have four children. [2]  
Mrs. Ichter is a daughter of businessman Alonzo Brown Catron (1897-1984) and the former Luta Edmonson (1904-1999), who are interred at the New Forest Cemetery in the village of Forest near Oak Grove in West Carroll Parish in northeastern Louisiana. [5]  The Ichters' daughter and son-in-law, Alana (born May 1950) and Ronald W. Greenwich (born July 1948), also reside in Minden. [3]  A son, Carlos Leslyn Ichter (born c. 1960), is the minister of music at the Tallowood Baptist Church in  Houston , Texas, and is a music graduate of Ouachita Baptist University in Arkadelphia, Arkansas, and Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary in  Fort Worth , Texas. [6]

Ichter said that one "cannot live a good or meaningful life without  God  in your life. Louisiana College taught me how to live and not just how to make a living." [3]