Martin Brian Mulroney  was the 18th  Prime Minister of Canada  from 1984-1993.

Mulroney was born in  Baie-Comeau ,  Quebec  in 1939, the son of an electrician. In 1955, he attended St. Francis Xavier University in Antigonish,  Nova Scotia , studying arts and commerce before majoring in political science. He graduated with honours in 1959, Mulroney studying law at Dalhousie University in  Halifax , and later at Laval University in  Québec City , a year later.  Always interested in politics, Mulroney ran for federal leadership of the  Progressive Conservative Party of Canada , in 1976 but lost to  Joe Clark .  In 1983 he ran again and won the party leadership.  The following year, Brian Mulroney led the Conservatives to the largest majority in Canadian history, winning 211 seats in the House of Commons in the 1984 election over  John Turner . Four years later the Conservatives won another majority.

In his nine years in office Brian Mulroney led  Canada  into a new economic age by reducing the government  deficit  spending of the  Liberal Party  and securing  free trade  with the  United States  and  Mexico  in the form of  NAFTA .  He set in motion the creation of Canada's newest territory,  Nunavut  and worked hard with the Canadian Provinces to strengthen the Canadian federation.  The  Meech Lake Accord  attempted to define conditions under which Quebec could sign the 1982 Constitution, but failed to become law when it was not passed by the  Manitoba  and  Newfoundland  legislatures. Another endeavour to secure constitutional unanimity was undertaken with the  Charlottetown Accord  in 1992. A national referendum was called on this agreement, and it was defeated.  Mulroney resigned from politics in 1993, but remains active as a lawyer in Canada.

During the 1990's,  Peter Newman  wrote a critique of Mulroney's administration, and revealed various ethically questionable practices of Mulroney's. In response, Mulroney delivered a message to the  Press Gallery Dinner , an event for journalists and politicians in Ottawa. Mulroney scrapped plans for a formal written-out message, and instead simply said his now-notorious, and profane, line: "Peter Newman, go (do) yourself. Good night."