The  Canadian Broadcasting Corporation  or  CBC  ( Société Radio-Canada  in French), is the national public broadcaster in  Canada .  A predecessor network was founded in 1923 as CNR Radio, a chain of radio stations to play on  Canadian National Railway  trains as a promotional feature, and then succeeded in 1932 by the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission, which in turn was succeeded by the CBC on November 2, 1936 by an Act of Parliament to function as both the public broadcaster and as the regulator of broadcasting in Canada. Its television unit,  CBC Television , began operations on September 6, 1952. The CBC was superseded as Canada's broadcasting regulator in 1958 by the independent Board of Broadcast Governors (the predecessor of today's Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission) following the passing of the Broadcasting Act of 1958 by the  Progressive Conservative  government of  John Diefenbaker  as a response to the demands of private broadcasters to establish second television stations, independent of the CBC, in major cities (a situation not possible prior to 1958 with the CBC acting as both the private broadcasters' regulator and their competition), which led to the subsequent creation of privately-owned commercial network  CTV  in 1961.

The CBC operates on a similar basis to its distantly related British cousin, the  British Broadcasting Corporation , although unlike the BBC's television service (which is non-commercial and is supported by a television tax, which it calls a "television licence fee"), CBC Television is supported by commercial advertising as a supplement to its government funding.

The CBC is accused of having a predominantly  liberal bias  by right-wing media outlets in the United States and Canada. It has long supported the positions of the  Liberal Party of Canada , acting as a government lapdog when the Liberals are in power (much like the  mainstream media  does with the  Democrat Party  in the United States) and as a "watchdog" against the government when the  Conservatives  form the government in  Ottawa . While the CBC is mandated to present an entirely non-partisan viewpoint, most scholars agree that the CBC instead opts for the position of consensus - hence its opposition to opponents of " global warming " and its predominantly hostile take on  Creationism  and  Intelligent Design , earning it harsh reviews from groups with interests in creationism.

The CBC provides Canadian material on its radio and TV networks, focusing on Canadian culture and arts. These programs are included in all television packages. Aside from the cultural content, the CBC also provides sporting coverage (most notably their long-running Saturday night broadcasts of  Hockey Night in Canada , featuring the Canadian teams of the  National Hockey League ), which has garnered itself a surprisingly large audience outside of Canada.