The  Carolina parakeet  ( Conuropsis carolinensis ) was once the only species of  parrot  native to the eastern  United States .  Considered a serious agricultural pest, Carolina parakeets were severely controlled during much of the 19th century; disease and the millinery and pet trades completed the bird's extinction by the mid-1920's.

The Carolina parakeet was a small bird, about the size of a  mourning dove ; it was 12 inches long and weighed about 10 ounces.  The pointed tail took up half the total length.  Both sexes were colored a brilliant green throughout, with the males bearing an orange forehead and cheeks, and a yellow head and neck.  A bluish tint existed on the bend of the wings, readily-seen when folded; the blue coloration was more predominant with the Louisiana subspecies.

Carolina parakeets were found through much of the eastern United States as far north as the Great Lakes region, though they generally were predominant east of the Appalachian Mountains south of Virginia and along the Gulf coast.  They were also spotted in flocks west of the Mississippi River in Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Colorado.

Their typical habitat was varied: wooded areas near rivers and wetlands, upland forests, and cleared farmland.  Nesting and reproduction is unknown, as no trained naturalist did a survey; it is speculated that the birds sought nests in cavities in cypress and sycamore trees previously used by woodpeckers.

Like all parrots, Carolina parakeets subsisted on seeds, which included elm, pine, maple, oak acorns, and others.  Apparently, it was the only North American animal of any kind which fed upon the cocklebur ( Xanthium strumarium ), a plant which contains a toxic glucoside. [1]

When the American continent had lands cleared for farming, the Carolina parakeet switched to a new diet rather easily, much to the dismay of farmers.  Of their voraciousness, Audubon wrote:

This in turn would bring out planters with shotguns, who discovered a behavioral problem which contributed much towards their extinction.  When one bird was killed, the remainder would fly away for a few moments, then return to the same spot to continue feeding. In this fashion a farmer could manage to kill off an entire flock in a matter of hours.

The birds noticeably declined in the mid-1800's due to the shotgun and the clearing of forested areas.  Able to be tamed and mimic words, the pet trade made inroads into its numbers as did a new trade: the millinery industry.  So many parakeets were killed so that their colorful plumage could be a part of women's fashion that their remaining numbers fell to the point of no return.  The last captive bird, a male named "Incas", died on February 21, 1918.  Sporadic, unconfirmed sightings of single birds and small flock occurred throughout the 1920's.  In 1939, the bird was officially declared extinct.