The  Causes of World War II  focus on  Germany  in Europe and  Japan  in the Pacific/Asian theatre.

For more information, see also  World War II

The war began with the German invasion of  Poland  on the 1st September 1939. Two days later,  Britain  and  France  declared war on Germany in response. To understand how this came to pass, however, it is necessary to be familiar with the historical context.

The condition of Germany in the aftermath of  World War I  is considered to be a contributing factor to their subsequent expansionism. The  Weimar Republic  that was founded at the end of WWI was struggling from the beginning. One reason were the harsh terms of  Versailles  treaty. Although the terms of the treaty were never fully enforced, the psychological damage was immense, since they were perceived as a grave injustice. The republic was also struggling with the rejection by monarchists, who were still occupying important positions in the state. Many WWI veterans believed that the German forces in WWI were not defeated, but that the social democratic leaders, who founded the Weimar republic to thwart a communist revolution, surrendered to the Allies for political gains. It was known as the "stab-in-the-back myth", and was used to discredit the republic.  [2]  Although the Weimar Republic enjoyed a time of economic resurgence after the early years of hyper-inflation it failed to gain deep public support. The Weimar Republic was famously called a  democracy without democrats .

In the early 1930 Germany was in a permanent political and constitutional crisis, caused by rising unemployment during the  Great Depression . Germany was hit harder than most other countries. The  National Socialists , known as the Hitler movement, promised to restore national pride and stature, by disbanding the  Versailles Treaty , and reverting the injustices imposed onto Germany on its international enemies. It was common to blame the "International Jewry" for the problems that were afflicting Germany. Part of this ideology was that Germany deserved to be larger, and that in order to survive, it would have to expand its "vital space" ( Lebensraum ) Eastwards, through political pressure and military conquest.

In 1935,  fascist   Italy  under the leadership of  Mussolini  invaded  Ethiopia , the only uncolonized nation in  Africa  and a member state of the  League of Nations . While Ethiopian Emperor  Haile Selassie  tried to get the League to help his country, his pleas in  Geneva  went unheard. Italy's colonial occupation of Ethiopia was marked by the aerial bombardment and use of poison gas against civilian populations.

In 1936, the Germans reoccupied the  Rhineland . This move was met with criticism, but little action was undertaken by France to oppose this move.

For a more detailed treatment, see  Spanish Civil War . 
At the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, both  Nazi Germany  and  Italy  sent troops to support a Fascist government, which Hitler hoped 
would later support him.

Germany's annexation of Austria in 1938 led to tensions between Germany and other nations, as the Treaty of Versailles forbade Germany from doing so.

The  Locarno Pacts  formed the background for the events of 1938 when Czechoslovakia was dismembered at Munich. When the guarantee of Locarno became due in 1936, Britain dishonored its agreement, the Rhineland was remilitarized and the way was open for Germany to move eastward. Poland protested vigorously at the refusal to guarantee her frontiers. [1]

At Munich, Hitler, British Prime Minister  Neville Chamberlain ,  Mussolini  and French Premier  Edouard Daladier  carved up Czechoslovakia without consulting anyone, least of all the Czechs and Slovaks. [2]  The outlawry of war was relatively meaningless without some sanctions that could compel the use of peaceful methods. Efforts in this direction were nullified by Britain. [3]

The Asian theater of World War II was mostly an extension of the  Second Sino-Japanese War .

China  was engaged at the same time in two separate wars. One was with Japan and the other with the  Comintern .  The Soviet Union fought China with an army of  Chinese revolutionaries , the CCP, directed and armed by the Soviet Union.  The Soviet Union's ambitions in China were to transform all northern China —  Sinkiang ,  Mongolia  and  Manchuria  — into Soviet dependencies and to convert what remained of China into a  Communist  satellite state.

The Japanese invasion of  Manchuria  in 1931 marked the beginning of World War II in Asia.  In March 1932 the Japanese set up the  puppet state  of  Manchukuo . On 24 February 1933, the  League of Nations  adopted a resolution calling for the non-recognition of Manchukuo, however the  Soviet Union  nonetheless did recognize Manchukuo and sold Japan the Chinese Eastern Railway in 1935.

For a more detailed treatment, see  Second Sino-Japanese War . 
In 1937 Japan moved south from Manchuria and began a full-scale war against China. The Japanese army was much more powerful, and quickly drove the Chinese, under  Chiang Kai-shek  to remote mountain areas. Japan controlled the major cities and seacoast, and most of China's population, and set up a puppet regime.  The United States strongly objected to Japan's moves, and began large-scale support for China.

CCP  Chairman  Mao Zedong  sent a secret directive to his followers IN 1944 which said:

See  Bibliography of World War II