Chivalry  was the medieval code of behavior for  knights .  It mandated loyalty to one's  lord  and to  God , and women were to be honored as the equivalent of the  Virgin Mary .  The Code of chivalry was not only intended to create good warriors, but also to endow knights with strong morals and  faiths .  The word itself comes from the French word for "knight",  chevalier .

Knights would usually take an  oath  of chivalry before partaking in the  Crusades , leading and protecting the pilgrims on their journey to  Jerusalem .

Chivalric romances, books which recounted the deeds of heroic knights such as King Arthur and Amadís de Gaula, were a popular genre of fiction in 16th century  Europe . They were satirized (and immortalized) in  Don Quixote , where an aging aristocrat attempts to apply anachronistic chivalric values to his own time, with disastrous results.

In modern terms,  chivalry  consists of the following behavior:

The concept of  chivalry  originated from various codes of behavior that were impressed upon knights. This took the form of a codified Code of Chivalry in or about the 12th century, largely spurred on by writings of Medieval courtly literature. Medieval courtly literature glorifies the valor, tactics and ideals of ancient Romans. For example, the ancient hand-book of warfare written by Vegetius called  De Re Militari  was translated into French in the 13th century as  L'art de chevalerie  by Jean de Meun. Later writers also drew from Vegetius such as Honore Bonet who wrote the 14th century  L'arbes des batailles , which discussed the morals and laws of war. In the 15th century Christine de Pizan combined themes from Vegetius, Bonet and Frontinus in  Livre des faits d'armes et de chevalerie .

In medieval times, the concept of  chivalry  was instilled in the minds of all who became knights, as part of their training. Today, the modern notion of chivalry is often ignored in western public education - false notions of  gender equality  are taught instead. The lack of chivalrous education in the public school system is one of many reasons why parents may prefer  homeschooling  for their children. (See  Homeschooling: Reasons for Homeschooling .)