Foundations 
 Jesus Christ 
 Gospel

Bible 
 Old Testament 
 New Testament 
 Ten Commandments

Christian Theology 
 Trinity :  Father ,   Jesus Christ ,  Holy Spirit 
 Nicene Creed 
 Creation 
 Defense of Christianity 
 Salvation

History and Traditions 
 Roman Catholic Church 
 Arianism 
 Orthodox Church 
 Crusades 
 Protestant Reformation   
 Counter Reformation 
 Protestantism 
 Missions 
 Great Awakening 
 Social Gospel 
 Mainline 
 Liberal Christians 
 Evangelical Christianss 
 Fundamentalism

Important Figures 
 Saint Paul 
 Saint Augustine 
 Thomas Aquinas 
 Martin Luther 
 John Calvin 
 John Wesley 
 Pope

Christianity  is the world's largest  religion , having 2.1 billion followers. [1]  In terms of its geographic distribution, Christianity is the  most globally  diverse religion. [2]   Christianity has always been the best way to turn one's life around, to achieve more, to overcome  addiction , and to enjoy life to a greater extent.

Christianity is the only religion that emphasizes  faith  rather than a mere belief system, and brings God closest to mankind through  Jesus  as the Son of  God .  Literally, Christianity means "of Christ," or "belonging to Christ," or "being like Christ." [3] [4] [5]  The  Book of Acts  (Acts:11:26) records that "the disciples were called Christians first in  Antioch ." The title  Christian  is also used in Acts 26:28 and 1 Peter 4:16. Christians believe in  God ,  resurrection of Jesus Christ ,  Heaven ,  virgin birth , survival of the  soul  after death, and the teachings of  Jesus Christ  as written in the  Bible .

The three largest self-governing bodies of Christians are:

Christian beliefs  are well supported via a large body of compelling evidence .  Theologians, over two millennia, have debated a definitive summary of the Christian faith. While its interpretations vary drastically, probably the most commonly accepted statement of the faith is the  Nicaea-Constantinopolitan Creed .

Christians and Christian denominations agree on many points of doctrine while disagreeing on some. According to an online Harris poll from 2003, 99% of all American Christians believe in  God , 96% in the  resurrection of Jesus Christ , 93% in  Heaven , 93% in the virgin birth, 92% in the survival of the soul after death, 82% in  Hell , 50% in ghosts, 27% in astrology and 21% in reincarnation. [6]  Note that the latter two beliefs are in opposition to the religious tenants of most Christian denominations.

Nonetheless, the Nicaea-Constantinopolitan Creed offers a general overall picture of what Christian theology looks like, and serves as a useful outline and historic standard. Other creeds may prove helpful in research. See the  Apostles' Creed  and the Athanasian Creed.

For a more detailed treatment, see  God . 
God is a triune being.  Though there is only one Divine nature there are three Divine Personages: The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.  The three Persons are collectively called the  Trinity  or the Holy Trinity. While God is tripartite, this does not imply that Christians are polytheists.  The doctrine of the Trinity is central to Christian theology, although several denominations that usually are considered Christian are non-Trinitarian. The God of the Christian is the creator of all things, is everywhere present, exists in all times, is transcendent, all-knowing (omniscient), just, and all-powerful (omnipotent).

A major theme of the Bible is  love .  In the Hebrew  Old Testament  the idea is expressed in the Hebrew word  hessed , which is variously translated as loyal love, tender mercy, steadfast love, mercy, goodness, etc.  in the  New Testament  the same idea is expressed in the Greek word  agape , which translates to love, compassion and charity.

During the reign of  Caesar Augustus  the Son (i.e. the second Person of the Trinity) took flesh from a virgin woman and was incarnated as a man. He was born in the town of  Bethlehem  and was given the name  Jesus .  At approximately the age of thirty he was baptised by his cousin  John the Baptist  and began to preach in the area of  Judea  and  Galilee . About three years later, his teachings and works of mercy prompted the Jewish authorities to plot Jesus' death. Jesus was  crucified . He rose from the dead and was seen by over 500 people. He ascended to Heaven. The four  Gospels  contain the basic account of what Jesus did and said.

Jesus summarized his moral teachings in two commandments from the Old Testament:

"'You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.' This is the great and foremost commandment. The second is like it, 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.' On these two commandments depend the whole Law and the Prophets". ( Matthew  22:37-39;  Deuteronomy  6:5; Leviticus 19:18)

The fundamental principle in Christian moral teaching is  love  and forgiveness, as expressed by the life and teachings of Jesus Christ and the New Testament. In the Hebrew  Old Testament  the idea is expressed in the Hebrew word  hessed , which is variously translated as loyal love, tender mercy, steadfast love, mercy, goodness, etc.  in the  New Testament  the same idea is expressed in the Greek word  agape , which is variously translated as love, compassion, charity, etc.

There has been endless debate over how a person should express love for God in his or her moral behavior. This moral dialogue found expression in the New Testament, where the  Apostle Paul  addressed such controversies as  circumcision  ( Romans  2:25-29), eating meat that was sacrificed to  pagan  deities (1 Corinthians 8), speculating about myths and genealogies (1 Timothy 1:3-5), and observing ceremonial dates and seasons (Galatians 4:9-11).

Jesus Christ affirmed, "By this all men will know that you are My disciples, if you have love for one another". (John 13:35) In trying to understand the reason for the growth of Christianity in a pagan culture, it has been noted that while love of one's neighbor is not an exclusively Christian virtue, it appears that the primitive Christian church practiced it much more effectively than any other group. [7]

In addition to sacrificially showing care for those within the community as well as to those without, (cf. Gal. 6:10) the Christians elevated the sanctity of life, opposing abortion, infanticide, child abandonment, suicide, and gladiatorial contests. [8] [9]   While the primitive church tolerated the existing and pervasive cultural economic institution of slavery in the  Roman Empire , the mandate of equal pay and just treatment (Col. 4:1; Eph. 6:9) greatly ameliorated the treatment of slaves, while advising them to seek freedom if possible, (1Cor. 7:21) and requiring that the escape slave Onesimus be received back not "as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved". (Philemon 1:6)  The Christian ethos of love also motivated a great expansion in the building of hospitals. [10] [11]  By A.D. 500, most large towns in in the Roman Empire had erected them. [12]

Christians believe with the New Testament that the death of Jesus, in conjunction with His resurrection, is an indispensable event for the reconciliation of lost sinners with God. There are three elements they see to the understanding of His death on the cross.

- Jesus having the knowledge that His path would lead to his own death, desired and willed that that take place, and persevered in that path though there was opportunity for Him to avoid it. "I have power to take my life and I have power to lay down my life. I lay down my life for the sheep".

- Jesus saw that in His death there would be a way for people to be brought back to the God from whom they were alienated and lost because of their sins. This would involve a substitution of Himself to effect, i.e. atone for, that development. "For the Son of Man came not to be served, but to serve and give His life as a ransom for many".  How this would take place was not new to the Jews of His day from their understanding of contemporary everyday practice of substitute payment - as in redemption of the first-born (Pidyon Ha Ben), or in the understanding of what aggadic stories such as the Binding of  Isaac  implied (see  Midrash ), but it was not the prevalent view that the Messiah was to be that payment. Though while alive on earth, he had hinted at it in sayings such as "unless a seed falls and dies, it remains alone, but when it dies, it brings forth."; it was only after He had risen from the dead that He explained Scripture (the Old Testament) clearly about the necessity of His death to have taken place. The disciples would henceforth preach, and Peter among them, that the death of Jesus the Messiah and His resurrection was for-planned and for-ordained by God the Father, and foretold in the Scripture (Isaiah 53).

- Christians of all generations have looked to the perfect Atonement, and the hope for reconciliation, accomplished by Jesus on the cross, to provide the means of understanding the solution to the vexing problems of the mind and of life itself.

The Bible teaches that "all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God". (Romans 3:23) This is often interpreted to mean that everyone has displeased God and is now separated from him in a kind of alienation and enmity that results from the fundamental conflict between selfish human interests and God's interests (Romans 8:5-8; James 4:4). Jesus offered a solution to this Biblical dilemma in that, by repentance of sins and faith in him (Jesus), their sins would be forgiven. He said that "...the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins". ( Mark  2:10) Jesus also said, "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance". (Mark 2:17).

Jesus Christ taught that "unless one is born again he cannot see the kingdom of God". ( John  3:3)  Protestant Evangelical Christianity often uses the terms "saved" and "born again" to mean conversion, while other Christians, such as the Roman Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church, use the phrase  born again  as a synonym for  baptized .

Christians are expected to continue living by Christ's teachings (John 8:31), as is appropriate for "children of Light". (Ephesians 5:8-10) Some believe that this is necessary in order to be saved. Others say that this is a common misconception of the text, that it refers instead to the "fruits" of saving faith. Christians in the  Reformed  tradition (following the teaching of the 16th century French lawyer and theologian  John Calvin ) say that salvation  cannot be lost. One Bible passage often cited is John 10:28-29 in which Jesus said of his own Apostles that they could not be snatched from his hand.

The  resurrection of Jesus Christ  is critical to the Christian faith.  The Apostle Paul wrote, "if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is vain, your faith also is vain" (I Cor:15:14).  Traditionally, Christianity has believed in a physical resurrection of Jesus Christ. [13]

In recent history,  Gary Habermas  is considered a leading  Christian apologist  for defending the resurrection of Jesus. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] 
Other notable defenders of the resurrection include:  William Lane Craig , [19]   Lee Strobel ,  Josh McDowell , [20]   Edwin M. Yamauchi , [21]   N.T. Wright [22]  and  Michael Horner . [23]

The fact of the Resurrection of Christ is also believed to produce certain effects on the lives of Christians.

1. It is because Jesus rose from the dead that believers now can resort to a living Savior to help and deliver them from sin and from situations overwhelming for them by their own powers.

2. The New Testament sees in the resurrection of Christ a certain vindication of what apparently to the world and to all beings was a failure and an overcoming of Him by His crucifixion.

3. The coming of Jesus back to life means to the believer that, indeed, his sins are totally forgiven. This is because believers know that His death was as a payment for sins - a "wage of death" for our sins that He received in our stead. If He remained dead, believers would know that the wage had not been fully paid.

4. It is a now-living Savior that Christians know can go before them, can closely lead them through life — as He did when He was on earth. This makes following Him practical and real.

5. The New Testament reveals that it is the Risen Christ who received from the Father the Holy Spirit and He, through Himself, ascended to the Father, has given the Holy Spirit to us. This gives the believer in Christ both the knowledge and the power to live a godly life and live a life that can be an intimately and personally directed one.

6. The resurrected Christ was no mere reassembling of the molecules and particles of the Body that had been crucified. It was, indeed, a physical body, but one that was fully glorified. It was a "spiritual body". Christians know that likewise, they will one day be granted the nature of a spiritual body, and be full of health. They therefore are full of hope and consolation, and consider that, even now in this life, there is an overcoming through Him.

Christians normally attend worship services at once a week, typically on Sundays (although some denominiations, like  Seventh Day Adventists  worship on Saturdays).  The  Catholic  and  Eastern Orthodox  denominations have seven sacraments:  baptism ,  eucharist ,  confirmation ,  confession ,  anointing of the sick ,  marriage , and  holy orders .  Of these, Protestants have preserved only baptism and eucharist, which are the only two sacraments for which they find Scriptural support.

In what is called the  Great Commission , Jesus sent his disciples out into the world to preach the Gospel (literally "good news") and make disciples.

Campus Crusade for Christ International (CCCI) is one of the world's largest evangelism organizations within Christendom and has over 25,000 full-time missionaries. In 2006, Alan Beeber of CCCI predicted that internet evangelism will result in more conversion that all other forms of evangelism for CCCI combined. [24]  At  YouTube , Christians and Christian creationists have faced problems with  atheist cyberbullies , but they  have developed methods to overcome this problem .

see also:   Global Christianity  and  Internet evangelism  and  Evangelical Christians  and  Resources on becoming a Christian

Christianity has seen tremendous growth over its 2000-year history. [26]  Christianity has recently seen explosive growth outside the  Western World . [27]  In 2000, there were twice as many non-Western Christians as Western Christians. [28]  In 2005, there were four times as many non-Western Christians as there were  Western World  Christians. [29]  There are now more non-Western missionaries than Western missionaries. [30]

In 2011, the  American Spectator  declared concerning research published in the  International Bulletin of Missionary Research :

Despite strong persecution in the  Middle East , thousands of  Muslims  are turning to Christ. [32]

The Bible records that that, at least initially, the church saw itself as united. In the community:

"...they continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. {43} And fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were done by the apostles. {44} And all that believed were together, and had all things common; {45} And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need. {46} And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, Praising God, and having favour with all the people. And the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved." "And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common."(Acts 2:42-47; 4:32)

This community was soon "scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judaea and Samaria, except the apostles," due to determined persecution which resulted in the dispersed disciples going "every where preaching the word." (Acts 8:1,4) Christian communities were primarily to be found in two separate cultural and liguistic entities—the Greek and Latin-speaking empires of Europe and the mid-east, and the Aramaic speaking sphere of the Parthian empire of the mid-east and far-east. This latter sphere encompassed not only the eastern portions of Syria, the Arabian peninsula, and Persia, but also extended to portions of southern India and even China. To this day there are many  Aramaic Church  members in the Kerala province of south India.

Justin martyr  100 A.D. - 165 A.D.   From the "First Apology" (Defense)

And this food is called among us Eukaristia [the Eucharist = the Thanksgiving], of which no one is allowed to partake but the man who believes that the things which we teach are true, and who has been washed with the washing that is for the remission of sins, and unto regeneration, and who is so living as Christ has enjoined. For not as common bread and common drink do we receive these; but in like manner as Jesus Christ our Saviour, having been made flesh by the Word of God, had both flesh and blood for our salvation, so likewise have we been taught that the food which is blessed by the prayer of His word, and from which our blood and flesh by transmutation are nourished, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus who was made flesh. For the apostles, in the memoirs composed by them, which are called Gospels, have thus delivered unto us what was enjoined upon them; that Jesus took bread, and when He had given thanks, said, "This do ye in remembrance of Me, this is My body;" and that, after the same manner, having taken the cup and given thanks, He said, "This is My blood;" and gave it to them alone... (Chapt. LXVl - of the Eucharist)

And we afterwards continually remind each other of these things. And the wealthy among us help the needy; and we always keep together; and for all things wherewith we are supplied, we bless the Maker of all through His Son Jesus Christ, and through the Holy Ghost. And on the day called Sunday, all who live in cities or in the country gather together to one place, and the memoirs of the apostles or the writings of the prophets are read, as long as time permits; then, when the reader has ceased, the president verbally instructs, and exhorts to the imitation of these good things. Then we all rise together and pray, and, as we before said, when our prayer is ended, bread and wine and water are brought, and the president in like manner offers prayers and thanksgivings, according to his ability, and the people assent, saying Amen; and there is a distribution to each, and a participation of that over which thanks have been given, and to those who are absent a portion is sent by the deacons. And they who are well to do, and willing, give what each thinks fit; and what is collected is deposited with the president, who succours the orphans and widows and those who, through sickness or any other cause, are in want, and those who are in bonds and the strangers sojourning among us, and in a word takes care of all who are in need. But Sunday is the day on which we all hold our common assembly, because it is the first day on which God, having wrought a change in the darkness and matter, made the world; and Jesus Christ our Saviour on the same day rose from the dead...(Chapt.LXVll - weekly worship of the Christians)

Tertullian (A.D. 160 -220), an Early ecclesiastical leader and writer, in his  Apology  (response to pagan charges) in describing the early church community wrote, ca. AD 197:

Pliny the Younger, the Roman governor of Pontus & Bithynia  (northern Turkey) from A.D. 111-113, reporting to emperor Trajan of Christians, whom such pagan rulers found intolerable:

see also:   Global Christianity  and  Internet evangelism

Given the increase in the public's access to global communications, it is thought that the more  theologically   conservative  non-Western Christian churches could influence Western Christianity to move in a more theologically  conservative  direction. [35]  For example, non-Western  Anglicans  are exerting influence within the worldwide Anglican Communion against the stance of the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Anglican Communion's North American provinces with regard to  homosexual  practices. [36] [37]

See also:   Christianity statistics

Historically, Christianity has had a positive effect on societies and there are a number of statistics which demonstrate this matter (see:  Christianity statistics ).

See also:   Atheism vs. Christianity

In the latter half of the 1600s, there was  an increase  in the degree of ideological conflict between  atheism  and Christianity in the  Western World . At first the conflict was of a secretive nature via the use of clandestine tracts. [38] [39]

As a result of  militant atheism  in the 20th century, there was widespread persecution against Christians in  Communist  countries such as the former  Soviet Union  and various Communist countries such as China continue to persecute Christians (see:  Communism and religious persecution ).

The 21st century is projected to be a century of  desecularization  and atheists are expected to lose influence in the West (and the world as a whole) as a result of religious immigration and the religious conservatives having a much higher fertility rate (see also:  Growth of global desecularization ).

In 2011, the  American Spectator  declared about the global population:

see also:   Resources on becoming a Christian

Below are some resources on becoming a  Christian :

Tips on choosing a Christian church:

Spiritual growth as a Christian:

Denominations or branches of Christianity

Disputed

Christianity in the World

American Christianity:

Other articles