In males,  circumcision  is the surgical removal of the foreskin which covers the head of the penis. This operation is usually performed early in a child's life. Circumcision is a common practice not only in the  United States  and the  Middle East , but throughout the world and history.  It is generally not practiced in most of Europe and largely unheard of in Eastern Asian countries.  Ritual circumcision is common in the  Jewish  and  Islamic  faiths, but uncommon altogether in  Asia ,  South  and  Central America , and most of  Europe . [1]   Circumcision was an outward sign of the covenent between God and the Jewish people as told in the  Bible  in the book of  Genesis .

Circumcision rates in the US have been declining since 1965, due in part to statements from the  American Academy of Pediatrics [2] [3] [4]  and the  American Medical Association   [5]  discouraging the practice.  While it varies regionally, in 2004 about 57% of newborn boys in the US were circumcised. [6]

The procedure lasts only ten minutes and is often performed in a hospital before the baby is taken home. Local anesthesia and antibacterial ointment are used to prevent pain and infection. Some boys may experience a small amount of bleeding or redness, and this is a normal part of the procedure.

The medical benefits suggested to accrue from circumcision are:

Despite these benefits, the  AMA  does not recommend routine infant circumcision. They state that because the incidence of urinary tract infection in infant males is low to begin with, circumcision is not justified as a preventive measure against this condition; because penile cancer is rare and occurs later in life, the use of circumcision as a preventive practice is not justified; and because behavioral factors are far more important risk factors for acquisition of HIV and other sexually transmissible diseases than circumcision status, circumcision cannot be responsibly viewed as "protecting" against such infections. The AMA concludes that "Existing scientific evidence demonstrates potential medical benefits of newborn male circumcision; however, these data are not sufficient to recommend routine neonatal circumcision." [8]

Female circumcision, practiced in parts of Africa, is a much different procedure that can have lasting effects on a girl's health. [9]   The procedure may range from a simple cut in the pubic region to the complete removal of parts of the female reproductive organs. While the procedure is an important part of some African cultures, there is increased pressure by women's groups worldwide to ban it.  Female circumcision is often referred to in the medical community as  Female Genital Mutilation , or FGM. [10]