The God's  created order  also referred to as  natural order  intended for  human beings  has been  revealed  in the  Bible [2]  that clearly defines humans as  male  and  female , not by  biological  accident, i.e. not by an aimless process of  evolution , but by  divine  purpose. [3] 
 God  has established a  norm  for  sex  and  marriage  by  creation [4]  and has given to humans a bodily structure unique to the man and the woman. [3]

The created order is reflected in the  Natural Law  and in  sexuality  it forbids the violation of given boundaries:

As can be demonstrated, for example in case of  homosexuality , by scientific device of  thought experiment , people in  society  can transgress the created order only to their own detriment. That's why the homosexual acts are universally condemned by the whole biblical tradition. [2]  The  perversion  of the created order is also referred to as 'an  abomination  against God' and it may be expected when men put the creation in place of the  Creator [4]  and when they rebel against Him in their  Nimrodian aspirations , i.e. when they exchange the truth of God and reality of creation for lie, and end up in  idolatry  and self-deluding illusions. An attempt to change the created order of  nature  is recorded in the Bible as the story of  Sodom  and the second century  B.C.   Testament of Naphtali  refers to it as the disorderliness of idolatry. [4]

The  Nazi  resister  Dietrich Bonhoeffer  claimed that unnatural can have its way at a time, but the life is always on the side of natural. Due to the vitality and power of natural life forms, the attempts for suppressing them will, sooner or later, suffer setbacks. That's why, in long time perspective, if the life will survive the turmoil and distortions of life forms temporarily imposed by unnatural, it will still ultimately prevail. [5]  The only question is at what cost. According to A.Mohler, many lives of victims of LGBTI  ideomotor effect  taking the heavy toll in  HIV  deaths could have been spared if  Christians  would have had more courage to impose their natural views on the rest of the society. The fundamental truth of created order runs counter not only to the  homosexual agenda  but to the rampant sexual immorality of the age. Most modern ideologies are basically just efforts to rationalize unnatural sexual behavior. E. Michael Jones defines the modernity as  "rationalized lust." [3]

The adherents of the gender theory and its later sequel, the transgender theory, declare that  "we get to choose our gender identity for ourselves, to decide whether gay or straight, male or female, in between, or none of the above."  The so-called  'gay' liberation movement  identified itself as ' LGBT ' and later they came up with the anagram 'LGBTQQ2IA', assuring that young people nowadays  "can redefine themselves at any time."   Scripture  however refutes any theory that promotes gender as only social construction or that human beings are free to define themselves in a way different than the way God defined them in the act of creation. [3]

While  Marxists  tried to  destroy the family  representing the created order in the name of progress, the contemporary homosexual movement attacks family under the pretext of compassion and  equality . [2]  The latter one attempts to hitchhike on the very term of  family  and adopt it onto disguised destructive forms of perverted  behavior . [6]