A  cult  is a term for a  religion  or community of belief that is regarded as illegitimate, heretical, or far outside mainstream beliefs.  Although some consider it to be a statement of opinion, "cult" has well-defined meanings.

Some religions labeled "cults" are dangerous, and in rare but well-publicized cases have proven to be fatal, such as Jim Jones' group in the late 1970s in Guyana (see  Jonestown Massacre ).

Strictly speaking, the terms "cult" and "sect" are not synonymous, although some people use the two terms interchangeably.
Although many groups consider themselves sects, naturally no group considers itself to be a cult.

In a general sense, a cult is a group which exercises mind control over its followers. [1]

In a  Christian  sense, a cult is a group which claims to be Christian but which has major doctrinal differences to normal Christianity. [1]

Josh McDowell  and Don Stewart list typical characteristics of cults, although not all cults have all these characteristics. [3]

In the  Catholic  Church, 'cult' can also be used to describe a follower's particular devotion to a  saint  or another aspect of the faith, e.g. the cult of  St Mary  or of the  Holy Cross . [4]  This usage does not have the negative connotations of the more common meaning described on this page. It is much less commonly used in the present day to avoid confusion with dangerous cults.

There have been cults which have claimed to be  Christian , as well as cults which claim some other religious affiliation, or no affiliation at all.  One notable example of a cult is the "People's Temple" operated by  Jim Jones .  Jones' insistence that all his true followers drink poisoned fruit punch led to the deaths of 913 of his converts at their enclave of  Jonestown  in  Guyana . Another example is the cult of Maratreanism.

The process of attempting to "rescue" people from cults, and reverse perceived or actual mind control, is known as  deprogramming , and is controversial from both a legal and social perspective.

Specious reasoning