Dance  is an  art  and is a form of movement, motions, and steps, usually done to  music . Dance is also a way of communicating, and has been around since the beginning of time. Dance comes in many different forms and categories, such as  Ballet , Modern,  Jazz , Ballroom (including  Waltz ,  Rumba ,  Salsa ,  Swing ,  Merengue , and  Tango ), Ethnic folk dancing (such as the  Polka ,  Irish Dance , and  Scottish Dance ),  Quadrille ,  Mazurka ,  Charleston , popular club dancing (such as  Square Dancing , the  Texas two-step ,  Country Western Dancing  and  breakdancing ), and many more. Professional dancers are both athletes and artists. Music for dancing can be supplied by any kind of instrument, but generally each kind of dance is associated with a particular type of music.

Dance is a transient mode of expression, performed in a given form and style by the human body moving in space. Dance occurs through purposefully selected and controlled rhythmic movements; the resulting phenomenon is recognized as dance both by the performer and the observing members of a given group.  Anthropologist Joann Kealiinohomoku. [1]

Ballet is a specific dance form and technique. Works of dance choreographed using this technique are called ballets, and may include dance, music, acting and mime.   [2]  Ballet was first developed in the  Renaissance  in Italy and France, and later in Russia as a concert dance form. Classical ballet is the most formal of the different ballet styles.  Ballet, as practised in Europe and the US, emphasizes the abstract geometry of bodily form exploring the heights and extensions the body can achieve both on the floor and in the air...

Dancing is mentioned nearly two dozen times in the Bible; the word indicates joyful, exuberant celebration either toward God (as worship) or toward a conquering hero (like David). In contrast, dancing is frowned upon in many Muslim cultures, where  Sharia law  forbids it.

According to Mark 6:22-29 the dancing of Herodias' daughter before  Herod  and his companions was so pleasing to him that he offered the girl anything "up to half my kingdom". Coached by her mother, she asked for the head of  John the Baptist .

Choreography  is the composition and arrangement of dances; the general art principles of design, like harmony, unity, variety, repetition, proportion, contrast, sequence, transition, balance and climax, must be used to create an aesthetic choreography. A ballet's choreography could be based on sources like: a story, a musical composition, or a painting.