The  date of Creation  has been debated for many years. Separate calculations have given different answers although most are fairly close to each other.

Any year that purports to date from Creation as an  epoch  is labeled  AM , for  Anno Mundi , which is  Latin  for "In the Year of the World."

The Bible contains  chronogenealogies  from  Adam  to  Abraham , listing the age at which each person in the genealogy gave birth to the next person in the list, thus allowing by simple addition a determination of how many years passed between  Creation  and Abraham.  There are other chronological indications also, allowing that calculation to be extended into the times of the kings, when the dates can be correlated with other events in history for which the absolute date is known.  By this means, in theory, one can calculate the date of Creation.

There are, however, some uncertainties in this.  For example, Genesis lists the age of Terah when the first of his sons was born, but was Abraham this son, or the second or third son?
Different researchers have proposed different approaches to this and similar problems, but none of these problems change the result by a very significant amount.

An objection that has often been raised is whether the chronogenealogies were  intended  to be used this way, or whether, for example, generations have been missed.
 Henry Morris , a pioneer of modern creationism, allowed for the possibility of gaps in the genealogies, but claimed that it was unreasonable to stretch the date back further than about 10,000 B.C.
In more recent times, however, creationists have concluded that there is no reason to think that there are gaps, and this view is supported by the consensus of the experts, according to  James Barr , then regius professor of Hebrew at  Oxford University , and not a young-Earth creationist (he also wrote a book attacking  biblical inerrancy ), who wrote in 1984: "… probably, so far as I know, there is no professor of Hebrew or Old Testament at any world-class university who does not believe that the writer(s) of Genesis 1–11 intended to convey to their readers the ideas that: … the figures contained in the Genesis genealogies provided by simple addition a chronology from the beginning of the world up to later stages in the biblical story."   [1]

Old-earth creationists do not accept this date, proposing that there may be gaps in the genealogies. [2]

The best known date of Creation is the one calculated by Archbishop  James Ussher  in the 17th century - namely 6:00 p.m. Saturday,  October 23 ,  4004 BC . [3]  Ussher calculated the year of Creation by the following means:

To arrive at the month and approximate date, Ussher concluded that Creation must have occurred during the Autumnal  Equinox , which in fact is the favorite start of many of the world's  calendars , ancient and modern. He  also  assumed that the ancient Hebrews  did not  attempt to synchronize their  months  with the  moon  until  after  their exile into  Babylonia . He thus calculated the date of Creation at October 23, 4004 BC according to the  Julian calendar .

Because the seven days of Creation (including one day of rest) set the pattern for our  week , Ussher decided that the Creation began on the first day of the week, i.e. Sunday.
However, because the day was defined as being an "evening and morning", and some calendars to this day still have the days beginning at sunset, Ussher concluded Creation actually began at what on modern western calendars would be 6 p.m. (sunset at the equinox) on Saturday.

James Ussher's calculation was the best-sourced calculation in all of Christendom at the time. Ussher also spoke with authority, and from a position of authority. For those reasons, his dates for various Biblical events appeared in the margins of  King James  and other Bibles for centuries, until the last quarter of the twentieth century, when publishers abandoned this practice. Sir  Isaac Newton  defended Ussher's date. [13]

Johannes Kepler  also attempted to calculate the date using his own methods (sadly lost to time); he worked it out to be 3992 B.C.

Such calculations in fact date from at least the Middle Ages, and offer a range of dates from around 5000 to 4000 BC. The date used by Eastern Orthodox Christianity is often 1 September, 5509 BC. This was the date used as the beginning point for their calendars. Traditionalist Catholics often use 5199 BC. Judaic tradition reckons the date of Creation at 3760 BC.  Another calculation, beginning with the date of the destruction of Jerusalem known from secular history and working backwards, arrives at 4163 BC. [14]

If  fallacious reasoning  is allowed—specifically, making a central (and implausible) assumption about the past to prove timing in the past—then it is possible to claim an older Creation as follows:

Old Earth creationists  don't attempt to calculate a date of Creation as they reject the biblical account being literal in favour of the age of the earth calculated by  naturalistic  scientists.