They tell us every chance they get that they dislike Bush. Also, that they are against the war in Iraq after they were for authorizing US Troops in harms way. Does anybody understand their position?-- jp  23:43, 29 April 2007 (EDT)

No more than the Republicans or any other political party.  Is it wrong to change your position based on new information?  Czolgolz  10:04, 30 April 2007 (EDT)

If your word is your bond, than yes, it is wrong to change your position. Especially, if it involves other peoples lives.-- jp  20:55, 1 May 2007 (EDT)

Well, new issues could arise before November 2008, but I think you were talking about Iraq: the truth is the government acted on faulty intelligence, and Bush and Co. were more than happy to sweep any unfortunate inconsistencies under the carpet, now congress knows they've been lied to, that's why they've changed their position (of course the high casualty rate is an important factor as well)

I had no trouble finding what the democrats stand for, it's right here on the internet: their platforms include reforming and improving higher education, withdrawal from Iraq (they share this with some republicans), introducing universal health care, switching to different energy sources than oil (they share this with some republicans), and restoring America's image in the world.

Middle Man

Ah ha, Middle Man and Hoji- now congress knows they've been lied to? By whom? The public statements on Iraq were made well before Bush taking office. You have no trouble finding what democrats stands for is too grey an answer. Let's leave behind the Iraq statements and focus on pre-election '06. Democrats are for reaching across the aisle in a bipartisan fashion. They are against reckless spending of pork projects. They are for removing corrupt officials from power. I can go on and on. Restoring Americas image in the world, would that be pre-9/11? Because I got news for ya, we were still not liked much before then. Maybe we've added the dislike from Europeans since then but Democrats are for 'Image in the World' or is it just what Europeans think that matters? -- jp  00:02, 5 May 2007 (EDT)

Crooks and Liars.com  -- Gulik2  03:29, 11 May 2007 (EDT)

Populism, or at least the appearance thereof in some cases more than others.  DanH  22:49, 1 May 2007 (EDT)