Demography  is the study of human populations, and is a major specialty in the disciplines of sociology, economics, history, geography, statistics and epidemiology.

Below are some demographic statistics related to:

See also:  Atheism statistics  and  Atheist population  and  History of atheism  and  Atheism and health

As a percentage of the world's population,  atheism  peaked in 1970. [2]   Global atheism is expected to decline in the 21st century and beyond in terms of its global market share. [3]

According to the  Encyclopædia Britannica , 2% of the world's population self-identifies as atheist and the average annual global change for  atheism  from 2000 to 2010 was −0.17%. [4]  See also:  Desecularization

A survey published in the 2005  Encyclopedia Britannica  stated that 2.3% of the world's population consists of individuals who profess " atheism , skepticism, disbelief, or irreligion, including the militantly antireligious." [5]  In regards to the 2.3% figure just mentioned, the 2005 survey cited by  Encyclopedia Britannica  survey did not include  Buddhist  in regards to the 2.3% figure and Buddhism can be  theistic  or atheistic. [5] [6]

On July 24, 2013,  CNS News  reported:

Dr. Todd M. Johnson is associate professor of Global Christianity and director of the Center for the Study of Global Christianity (CSGC) at Gordon-Conwell Seminary, Massachusetts. He is co-author of several important resources in the emerging field of religious demography, including The World’s Religions in Figures (2013) and Atlas of Global Christianity (2009).

If present trends continue, Johnson projects that by 2100 two-thirds of the world’s population would be either Christian or Muslim. [7]

"Atheists, agnostics and other people who do not affiliate with any religion – though increasing in countries such as the United States and France – will make up a declining share of the world’s total population." - Pew Research, The Future of World Religions: Population Growth Projections, 2010-2050 [8]

On December 23, 2012, Professor  Eric Kaufmann  who teaches at Birbeck College, University of London and whose academic research specialty is how  demographic  changes affect religion/irreligion and politics, wrote:

On the other hand, the secular West and East Asia has very low fertility and a rapidly aging population... In the coming decades, the developed world's demand for workers to pay its pensions and work in its service sector will soar alongside the booming supply of young people in the third world. Ergo, we can expect significant immigration to the secular West which will import religious revival on the back of ethnic change. In addition, those with religious beliefs tend to have higher birth rates than the secular population, with fundamentalists having far larger families. The epicentre of these trends will be in immigration gateway cities like New York (a third white), Amsterdam (half Dutch), Los Angeles (28% white), and London, 45% white British.
 [10]

See also:   WIN/Gallup International studies on global atheism and religion

The Observers reported: "The WIN/Gallup International poll from 2012 found that 13% of the global population was atheist. By 2015, the number of atheists had dropped by two percentage points. [11]

The website Science.20 declared on July 14, 2015:

First, a community’s possession of atheistic world-views—for whatever reason—correlates with low or negative birth rates. The most significant examples are East Asian and European countries, which are at “below replacement” rates of birth, shrinking at speed.

Second,  “forced” atheism  has been disappearing steadily over the past 40 years and we see a corresponding surge of people towards spiritual clusters. In percentage terms, 1970 may be considered the high point for global atheism and agnosticism. As communism weakened, and eventually collapsed in 1989, there was a significant resurgence of religious belief (see chart below). The same thing is now happening in China.

Third, the surge of popularity for a novel type of “evangelical atheism” which began about a decade ago appears to be losing some of its steam. The movement’s celebrity leaders have fallen out of the bestseller lists, and are often now criticized by their former cheerleaders in newspaper columns. After a high-publicity start in 2013, Sunday Assemblies have plummeted out of the limelight and growth has been glacial.

And the near future? The latest global data also shows that young people, classified as those under 34, tend to be measurably more religious (66%) than older ones (60%). “With the trend of an increasingly religious youth globally, we can assume that the number of people who consider themselves religious will only continue to increase,” said Jean-Marc Leger, President of WIN/Gallup International Association.

..the view that atheism will sweep the globe to produce a non-believing utopia is extremely unlikely. The shrinking of the skeptical share of humanity is inevitable, as Welsh geneticist Steve Jones has stated

..the data suggests that the global proportion of atheists will fall, while the number of pro-spiritual, pro-science middle group will grow. [2]

Ipsos , a major global market research company, published a report on report on religious belief/skepticism from a worldwide perspective and the report provides  various statistics gained from survey results .

See also:   Growth of evangelical Christianity

In 2012, the  W. Edwards Deming Institute  published a report by the World Future Society which indicated:

See also:   Atheist population  and  Asian atheism  and  Secular Europe

The current  atheist population  mostly resides in  East Asia  (particularly China) and in secular Europe/Australia primarily among whites. [13]  See:  Global atheism  and  Western atheism and race

Razib Khan points out in  Discover Magazine , "most  secular  nations in the world are those of East Asia, in particular what are often termed “ Confucian  societies.” It is likely therefore that the majority of the world’s atheists are actually East Asian." [14]  See:  Asian atheism

See also:   Asian atheism

See also:   Growth of Christianity in China  and  East Asia and global desecularization

China  has the world's largest  atheist  population. [15] [16]

According to  Slate , " Protestant  Christianity has been the fastest growing religion in China." [17]   Evangelical Christianity  is especially growing sharply in China. [18]

On November 1, 2014, an article in  The Economist  entitled  Cracks in the atheist edifice  declared:

Yang Fenggang of Purdue University, in Indiana, says the Christian church in China has grown by an average of 10% a year since 1980. He reckons that on current trends there will be 250m Christians by around 2030, making China’s Christian population the largest in the world. Mr. Yang says this speed of growth is similar to that seen in fourth-century Rome just before the conversion of  Constantine , which paved the way for Christianity to become the religion of his empire. [19]

See:  Ethnic Chinese and the rise of Christianity in Southeast Asia

See also:   Secular Europe

The website Science 2.0 reported in 2015 about  secular Europe :

Outside East Asia, the three countries often listed as the least religious in the world, the places where (the media tells us) atheists dominate, are Estonia, Sweden and the Czech Republic.

In support of this assertion, we usually find the Eurobarometer Poll 2010 quoted, which shows that only 18% of people in Sweden and Estonia believe in God, and only 16% of people in the Czech Republic have that particular belief. That seems clear enough. These are atheist countries, right?

But no. That same poll also asked respondents whether they believe in some sort of ultimate force or great spirit. “Yes” answers came from 44% in the  Czech Republic , 45% in  Sweden  and 50% in  Estonia .

So then we do the math: the number of citizens who believe in the existence of some sort of deity-like presence, called God or The Force or something else, is actually 60% in Estonia, 63% in Sweden, and 68% in Estonia, according to the exact same survey. They are certainly not all churchgoers. But contrary to conventional wisdom, in all three countries, atheists were a minority, and the dominant groups were the middle grounders – people whose beliefs are hard to define except for one thing: they don’t think of themselves as atheists. [20]

See also:   Secular Europe

Denmark  has the highest rate of belief in evolution in the  Western World . [21]  In addition, in 2005  Denmark  was ranked the third most atheistic country in the world and the website adherents.com reported that in 2005 43 - 80% of Danes are  agnostics /atheists/non-believers in God. [22]

Finland  was ranked the 7th most atheistic country in the world in 2005. [22]  Finland has the 17th highest rate of belief in evolution in the Western World. [22]

France  was ranked the 8th most atheistic country in the world in 2005. [22]  France has the 4th highest rate of belief in evolution in the Western World. [21]

In 2005, the  Netherlands  was ranked the 13th most atheistic country in the world and the website adherents.com reports that in 2005 39 - 44%% of the Dutch were  agnostics / atheists /non-believers in God. [22]  The Netherlands also has the 11th highest rate of belief in  evolution  as far as  Western World  nations. [21]

In 2005, it was reported that  Germany  is one of the most  atheistic  countries in the world and the website adherents.com reports that 41-49% of Germans are  agnostics /atheists/non-believers in God. [22]  In addition, Germany has the highest rates of belief in  evolution  in the  world . [21]  In 2005, it was estimated that 70% of Germans believed in evolution. [23]

Estonia  is one of the least  religious  areas in the world.  Merely 14% of the population declared religion an important part of their daily lives. [24]

From a historical perspective, the  Czechs  have been characterised as "tolerant and even indifferent towards religion". [25]  According to the 2011 census,  34.2% of the Czech population declared they had no religion, 10.3% was  Roman Catholic  and 10.2% followed other forms of religion both denominational and nondenominational. Furthermore, 45.2% of the population did not answer the question about religion. [26]  From 1991 to 2001 and further to 2011 the adherence to Roman Catholicism decreased from 39.0% to 26.8% and then subsequently to 10.3%. [27]

See also:   Secular Europe and domestic violence  and  Sweden and domestic violence

In March 2014, the  Swedish  news website  The Local  published an article entitled  Sweden stands out in domestic violence study  which declared:

In the Scandinavian countries, in contrast, around half of the women reported physical or sexual violence, which researchers at the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights said could have several explanations...

In Sweden, 81 percent of women said they had been harassed at some point after the age of 15 - compared to the EU average of 55 percent. After Sweden, which had the highest rate,  Denmark ,  France , the Netherland and  Finland  all saw rates above 70 percent. The EU member state with the lowest rate - 24 percent - was Bulgaria. [28]

After  WWII ,  Australia  has become a very  secular  country. [30]

According to the  Sydney Morning Herald :

Religion does not play a central part in the lives of many Australians: 48 per cent of Australians surveyed said they did not partake in personal prayer and 52 per cent said they rarely attended a place of worship for religious reasons. [31]

In the 2011 Australian census, 22.3% of Australians (or 4,796,787 people) identified themselves as having "no religion" which was more than 3 percent higher (and 1,090,232 people more) than in the 2006 census and was the second largest category. [32]  Another 2.014 million (9.4%) were in the "not-stated or inadequately-defined" category: thus more than 31% of Australians did not state a religious affiliation in the 2011 census. [33]

See also:   Atheism, race and gender

See also:   Western atheism and race

In 2015,  BloombergView  reported concerning the  United States :

...Craig Keener, in his huge review of claims of miracles in a wide variety of cultures, concludes that routine rejection of the possibility of the  supernatural  represents an impulse that is  deeply Eurocentric . [38]

In the United States, blacks have the highest rate of religiosity. [39]  Among Hispanics, religion has traditionally played a significant role in daily activity. [40]

At the same time, due to immigration,  Europe  is expected to become  more desecularized  in the 21st century (See also:  Global atheism  and  Atheist population ).

The  atheist   Sikivu Hutchinson  declared “If mainstream freethought and  humanism  continue to reflect the narrow cultural interests of white elites who have disposable income to go to conferences then the secular movement is destined to remain marginal and insular.” [41]

The atheist community has not had significant outreach to racial minorities within the  Western World  whereas Christians have done this (particularly among the poor). [16]  See also:  Atheism and uncharitableness

In 2010, an atheists' conference was organized in the  United States  concerning the future direction of the atheist movement and 370 people attended. The conference, sponsored by the Council for Secular Humanism, drew members from all the major atheist organizationsin the United States.  The  New York Times  described the attendees as "The largely white and male crowd — imagine a  Star Trek  convention, but older..." [42]

Survey data and website tracking data of prominent atheists' websites indicate that in the  Western World ,  atheism appears to be significantly less appealing to women . [36] [43] [44]  These findings suggest that the atheist movement in the  Western world  and the  New Atheism  movement are significantly more appealing to white males.

In 2011, Beliefnetnews reported concerning the race and gender of American atheists:

But making atheism more diverse is proving to be no easy task.

Surveys suggest most atheists are white men. A recent survey of 4,000 members of the Freedom from Religion Foundation found that 95 percent were white, and men comprised a majority. [45]

See also:   Western atheism and race  and  Atheism and diversity  and  Atheism and culture

Since  World War II  a majority of the most prominent and vocal defenders of the  evolutionary  position which employs methodological naturalism have been  atheists  and  agnostics  (see also:  Causes of evolutionary belief ). [46]   Charles Darwin 's book  The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life  has been translated into 35 languages. [47]

In terms of its geographic distribution,  Christianity  is a much more a  global religion  than most, if not all, religions (See also:  Global Christianity ). [48] [49]    The  Bible  has been translated into 518 languages and 2,798 languages have at least some portion of the Bible. [50]

Collectively speaking, the Christian community has a much greater degree of linguistic and cultural diversity than the atheist community (see also:  Atheist community and verbal–linguistic intelligence ).

See also:

See also:   Atheism and women

Surveys throughout the world and other data indicate that women are less inclined to be  atheists . [52] 
 [53]

In 2016, Atheist Alliance International (AAI) conducted an annually reoccurring atheist census project and found:

See also:   Atheism and diversity

In November 2010,  Discover Magazine  published survey results published by the World Values Survey which showed significant differences between the percentage of men and women who are  atheists  for various countries with men outnumbering women in terms of adopting an  atheist worldview . [55]

In 2015, BloombergView reported concerning the  United States : "According to a much-discussed 2012 report from the Pew Research Center on Religion and Public Life, ...women are 52 percent of the U.S. population but only 36 percent of atheists and agnostics. [56]

A 2009 article in LiveScience.com entitled  Women More Religious Than Men  reported: "A new analysis of survey data finds women pray more often then men, are more likely to believe in God, and are more religious than men in a variety of other ways...The latest findings, released Friday, are no surprise, only confirming what other studies have found for decades. [57]   In 2007, the Pew Research Center found that American women were more religious than American men. [57]

Oxford University Press reports about a previous study done by AAI:

See also:   Asian atheism

China  has the largest atheist population in the world. [15]   The current  atheist population  mostly resides in East Asia (particularly China) and in secular Europe/Australia primarily among whites. [59]  See:  Western atheism and race

Due to sex-selection  abortion  and female infantcide, there is a gender imbalance within the Chinese population.

According to 2012 figures from the National Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of China, China’s sex ratio at birth (the number of boys born for every 100 girls) was as high as 118, while the sex ratio amongst the total population was about 105. [60]   The statistical data from China indicates that the gap between male and female at birth is far larger than the biologically benchmark ratio (a sex ratio at birth of around 105 males per 100 females). [61]

The YouTube atheist  Thunderf00t  estimates that there was a 2 to 1 ration as far as men to women attending  Reason Rally 2016 . [62]

In June 2010, the atheist  PZ Myers  commented that  atheist meetings  tend to be significantly more attended by males. [53]  In October 2012, the atheist Susan Jacoby wrote in  The Humanist  concerning atheist meetings: "When I speak before non-college audiences — that is, audiences in which no one is required to be there to get credit for a college course — 75 percent of the people in the seats are men." [63]

For more information, please see:

In October 2010, an atheists' meeting was organized in the  United States  concerning the future direction of the atheist movement and 370 people attended. The  New York Times  described the attendees as "The largely white and male crowd — imagine a  Star Trek  convention, but older...". [64]

In 2011, Beliefnetnews reported concerning the race and gender of American atheist:

But making atheism more diverse is proving to be no easy task.

Surveys suggest most atheists are white men. A recent survey of 4,000 members of the Freedom from Religion Foundation found that 95 percent were white, and men comprised a majority. [65]

The website  Freethought Blogs  has significantly less women visiting their website than men according to the web traffic tracking company  Quantcast . [66]

The above data suggest that atheism in general and the New Atheism movement is significantly less appealing to women in the  Western World .

See also:   Atheist indoctrination  and  Religion and education  and  American atheism

The Pew Research Forum reported in 2013 concerning American atheists: "About four-in-ten atheists (43%)  have a college degree , compared with 29% of the general public." [67]

In 2012, the Pew Research Forum reported regarding American atheists: "And about 38% of atheists and agnostics have an annual family income of at least $75,000, compared with 29% of the general public." [68]   See also:   Atheism/Christianity and socioeconomic status diversity

See also:   Atheism and diversity

Most atheists fall on the  left  side of the political spectrum (see:  Atheism and politics  and  Secular left ).

The secular left in the  Western World  often publicly stresses the importance of  diversity .

Yet, as far as the issue of diversity within the  atheist population , compared to  Christianity ,  atheism  has a significantly less degree of geographic/cultural, racial, gender and socioeconomic status  diversity  (seee:  Atheism and diversity ).