Dr. Laura Schlessinger  is a radio talk host and author specializing in relationship issues.  She holds a Ph.D. in  physiology  from  Columbia University , [1]  but did not seek an advanced degree in any field of counseling.  Giving advice from a position of commonsense values, Schlessinger is very straightforward and sometimes abrasive, but always clear in her position and extolling the listener to do what is right.  A venture on TV was short lived when it was denounced by  homosexual  groups who were annoyed that Schlessinger would not treat their lifestyle as being equal with  heterosexuality . [2]  Dr Schlessinger later apologized unreservedly for her comments against the homosexual community, saying "I regret the hurt this situation has caused the gay and lesbian community" and said that her apology was heartfelt. [3]  A conservative that strongly believes in family values and putting children first in relationships, she is heard by 8 million listeners daily, putting her fourth in radio ratings [4]

No stranger to controversy, Schlessinger again came under heavy attack when she was broadcast using the "N-word" multiple times in her show in 2010. [5]  However, she was supported in her right to say what she felt by former Vice-Presidential candidate Sarah Palin who urged her to "reload" and that Schlessinger would be "even more powerful & effective w/out the shackles". [6]  Dr. Laura announced she would end her radio show when her contract expires at the end of the year, due to  Liberal censorship  of her First Amendment rights. However, she did not follow through on her statement and is still on the air on Satellite Radio. [7]

Very vocal in her ties to  Orthodox Judaism  and yet backed strongly by  Christians , she was even given the  National Religious Broadcasters  yearly award, the first non-Christian to receive it.  In recent years Schlessinger has cut her ties to Orthodox Judaism.  She is still widely embraced in conservative circles, who have forgiven her affair and subsequent published nude photographs. [8]