Dwayne Bradley Stovall  (born 1966) is a businessman and school board member from Cleveland in Liberty County in southeastern  Texas , who was a  Republican  candidate for the  United States Senate  in the  primary  election held on March 4, 2014. He and six challengers, including  U.S. Representative   Steve Stockman , failed to deny re-nomination to  John Cornyn , who has held the seat since 2002 and is the Senate Minority Whip. Cornyn won nearly three-fifths of the votes cast in his party primary.

On his website, the  conservative  Stovall calls himself a "small-r republican ... who refuses to remain silent while tyranny grows and liberty is destroyed." [1]

Stovall was born in Baytown, near  Houston , where his father worked in the oil fields. He spent the first decade of his life in a neighborhood built by the Humble Oil Company. The small residences in the subdivision were humorously called "Humble camps". He lived in  Alaska  for several years in the 1970s, when his father worked on the construction of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System. In 1984, Stovall graduated from West Rusk High School in New London in Rusk County in East Texas. He attended Kilgore Junior College in Kilgore and Texas State University in San Marcos, then the institution was known as  Southwest Texas State University , [1]  also the alma mater of the late  U.S. President   Lyndon B. Johnson , who from 1949 to 1961 held the Senate seat that Stovall is seeking. Stovall did not obtain a degree from TSU.

While attending SWTSU, Stovall began employment in shift work at the Atlantic Richfield refinery in Pasadena, also near Houston, Texas, where he worked for thirteen years. In 1996, he launched Diamond K Equipment, Inc. , and moved to Liberty County shortly thereafter. He worked for what was then Lyondell-Citgo Refining until 2001, when he began full-time in his business, which then specialized in bridge construction, primarily for the Texas Department of Transportation, in all parts of the state. In 2011, Diamond K began to branch into the testing of emissions testing in the oil fields. [1]

He is a member of the Tarkington Independent School District trustees. He lists his religious affiliation as " Christian ". [1]  He and his wife, his childhood sweetheart, Katherine Brackeen Stovall, have three children. [2]

In 2012, Stovall ran unsuccessfully in the Republican primary for the District 18 position in the Texas House of Representatives. He polled a third of the vote against fellow Republican John Otto, [3]  who then ran unopposed in the November general election.

Stovall has repeatedly won straw polls at meetings across Texas of the  Tea Party movement . He carries the backing of various conservative political groups but no prominent politicians in his state. Stovall is supported by the Tea Party group, "Grassroots America - We the People" and "Houston Young Republicans". Another group, "Southern Conservative" switched its support from Steve Stockman to Stovall. [2]  On December 3, 2013, Stovall won a straw poll in Nacogdoches County in East Texas. [4]

He received  considerable attention from a television advertisement that first aired in early February 2014 in which he ridicules Senate Minority Leader  Mitch McConnell  of  Kentucky , Cornyn's superior in the Senate leadership, as an ineffective "Beltway turtle". [5]

The established media, however, had until the turtle ad largely ignored Stovall's candidacy. Stovall supporters claim the media is involved in the suppression of voices, such as Stovall, who oppose powerful well-known names in  Washington, D.C. [6]  Greta Van Susteren of  Fox News  called Stovall a "jerk" for running the "turtle" ad against Senator McConnell: "You can be clever and funny in ads … or you can be gratuitously insulting." [7]

Stovall, who often drove his truck alone to campaign events, considers himself as "an average Texan" who believes that the position of U.S. senator has "become grossly misused. ... A senator’s job is to look out for [his] state's respective interest, not the interests of the federal government." [8]

Stovall finished third in the Senate race with 140,407 votes (10.7 percent); Stockman was second with 250,759 (19.1 percent). Cornyn polled 778,967 votes (59.44 percent). Stovall even lost his home county of Liberty to Cornyn. [9]