The  endosymbiotic theory , known to academics as the serial endosymbiosis theory (SET), is a  scientific theory  concerning 
the origins of  mitochondria , plastids (e.g.  chloroplasts ), and  nuclei  in  eukaryotic cells . According 
to this hypothesis, these organelles arose from free-living bacteria that were taken inside another cell as endosymbionts.

Citing a biology textbook  Creation Ministries International  writes:

‘In the endosymbiont theory, the ancestor of the eukaryotic cell (we will call this organism a protoeukaryote) is presumed to have been a large, anaerobic, heterotrophic prokaryote that obtained its energy by a glycolytic pathway. Unlike present-day bacteria, this organism had the ability to take up particulate matter … .  The endosymbiont theory  postulates that a condition arose in which a large, particularly complex, anaerobic prokaryote took up a small aerobic prokaryote into its cytoplasm and retained it in a permanent state [emphasis added].’

Whichever way it is stated, it is given an aura of authority and certainty by its frequent repetition in writings on cell biology. Many students find it convincing. However, like many  evolutionary  ideas, it may look solid from a distance, but gaps appear on close scrutiny.

The evidence for the endosymbiont theory revolves around selected similarities between mitochondria and bacteria, especially the DNA ring structure. However, these similarities do not prove evolutionary relationship. There is no clear pathway from any one kind of bacteria to mitochondria, although several types of bacteria share isolated points of similarity. Indeed, the scattered nature of these similarities has left plenty of room for a less-publicized ‘direct evolution’ theory of mitochondrial origin, in which they never had any free-living stage. There is enough diversity among the mitochondria of protozoa to make evolutionists wonder if endosymbiotic origin of mitochondria occurred more than once.

Mitochondrial DNA

The endosymbiont theory implies that there should be considerable autonomy for mitochondria. This is not the case. Mitochondria are far from self-sufficient even in their DNA, which is their most autonomous feature. Mitochondria actually have most of their proteins coded by nuclear genes, including their DNA synthesis enzymes. [1]

See also:   Homology

Creation scientists  and  creationists  argue that similarity is not just explainable by  creation , but predicted.   Christian apologist   JP Holding  explains:

To frame our argument against the evolutionists’ misuse of homologous structures requires us to have an understanding of certain values critical to ancient persons. Roman literature of the New Testament period tells us that ‘(t)he primary test of truth in religious matters was custom and tradition, the practices of the ancients.’ In other words, old was good, and innovation was bad. Change or novelty was ‘a means value which serves to innovate or subvert core and secondary values.’

By itself, this demolishes one part of the evolutionists’ argument and makes it, clearly, a case of arbitrary imposition of modern values. In a context such as the above, ‘radically different design’ would have indicated to an ancient reader either no deity, or else a deity whose means was chaos and instability, or a deity who did not have mastery over creation. [2]

See also:   Theory of Evolution and Cases of Fraud, Hoaxes and Speculation  and  Creation science  and  Intelligent design

See also:   Theory of Evolution and Cases of Fraud, Hoaxes and Speculation  and  Creation science  and  Intelligent design

The endosymbiotic hypothesis was first articulated by famed  Russian  botanist Konstantin Mereschkowski in 1905 [3] . Mereschkowski based his theory in part on work done by botanist Andreas Schimper, who had observed in 1883 that the division of chloroplasts in green  plants  closely resembled that of cyanobacteria. Schimper had himself tentatively proposed (in a footnote) that green plants could have arisen from the symbiosis of two simpler organisms. [4]  In the 1920s, Irvin Wallin, a  professor  at the University of Colorado Medical School, extended the idea of an endosymbiotic origin to the mitochondria. [5]  These theories were initially dismissed (or ignored) by the scientific community, but later became fashionable within the  evolutionist  community.

The endosymbiotic hypothesis was advanced in 1967 by  American  biologist Lynn Margulis. A young faculty member at  Boston University , Margulis authored a theoretical paper entitled  The Origin of Mitosing Eukaryotic Cells [6] . The paper, however, was "rejected by about fifteen scientific journals," Margulis recalled [7] . It was finally accepted by  The Journal of Theoretical Biology .

The possibility that peroxisomes may have an endosymbiotic origin has also been considered, although they lack DNA. Christian de Duve proposed that they may have been the first endosymbionts, allowing cells to withstand growing amounts of free molecular  oxygen  in the  Earth's  atmosphere. It is believed by  evolutionists  that over millennia these endosymbionts transferred some of their own DNA to the host cell's nucleus during the evolutionary transition from a symbiotic community to an instituted eukaryotic cell (called "serial endosymbiosis"). This hypothesis is thought to be possible because it is known today from scientific observation that transfer of DNA occurs between  bacteria  species, even if they are not closely related. Bacteria can take up DNA from their surroundings and have a limited ability to incorporate it into their own  genome .