The  Enumclaw horse sex case  was a 2005 incident in which Kenneth Pinyan, who was an American Boeing engineer residing in Gig Harbor, Washington, died from injuries received during receptive rectal sex with a stallion at a farm near the city of Enumclaw, Washington. [1]  Pinyan also distributed bestiality porn under the alias Mr. Hands. [2]

The  Associated Press  reported that the farm where the event occurred attracted "a significant number of people" who wanted to engage in bestiality and the  Seattle Times  published a number of articles on the Enumclaw horse sex case. [3]

In 2007, a documentary of the life and death of Kenneth Pinyan (as well as the life led by those who came to the farm near Enumclaw, Washington) was featured at the Sundance Film Festival under the title  Zoo . It was one of 16 winners out of 856 film candidates for the festival, and it played at numerous regional festivals in the United States subsequently. [4]  In addition, it was also selected as one of the top five American films to be presented at the Directors Fortnight sidebar at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival. [5] [6]

See also:   Washington state and bestiality

In 2005, columnist Danny Westneat reported in the  Seattle Times :

What's more, four more of the year's 20 most clicked-upon local news stories were about the same horse-sex incident. We don't publish our Web-traffic numbers, but take it from me — the total readership on these stories was huge.

So much so, a case can be made that the articles on horse sex are the most widely read material this paper has published in its 109-year history.

I don't know whether to ignore this alarming factoid or to embrace it. [7]

See also:   Atheism and bestiality  and  Evolutionary belief and bestiality  and  Liberalism  and bestiality

In areas of the  Western World  where there is a significant amount of  atheists  and  evolutionary  belief, there have been notable problems related to  bestiality  (see:  Bestiality and various geographic areas  and  Atheism and bestiality  and  Evolutionary belief and bestiality  and  Bestiality and secular Europe ).

In 2017, as far as the United States, the website WorldAtlas.com ranked Washington state as having the 5th highest percentage of atheists. [8]   According to the CUNY 2000 religious survey,  Washington  was declared to have the second highest  per capita  number of people in the United States who answered " no religion " on a survey. [9]  27% of the Washington state population declared they had "no religion". [10]  In addition, in 2007 the pro- evolution  magazine the  Scientific American  said that Washington state did a "satisfactory/good" job of teaching evolution (see:  Evolutionary belief and bestiality ) [11]

See also:  Atheism and bestiality

A 2011 study reported by  CNN  indicated that Washington state was a politically  liberal  state (see:  Liberalism and bestiality ). [12]