Eris was first photographed on October 21, 2003, but was at first too slow-moving for the Palomar Observatory image-analytic software to detect. Later,  Michael E. Brown ,  Chad Trujillo , and  David Rabinowitz  ordered  re-analysis of the images with greater sensitivity. They soon realized that the images depicted a new object, and announced their findings on January 5, 2005.

The initial name for the new object was Xena, the title character in an  American   television  action-adventure dramatic series, [9]  and also a name beginning with X, in keeping with the suspicion that this object was the long-sought "Planet X." The object also had a satellite, which the discoverers tentatively named Gabrielle, after the supporting character in that dramatic series.

The announcement of Eris' discovery on July 29, 2005 presented the  International Astronomical Union  with an embarrassing problem. [10]  Other observations, specifically of the period and orbital characteristics of the satellite, [11] [12]  had already suggested that 2003 UB 313  might be more massive even than  Pluto , then considered the ninth  planet  in the  solar system . Because planets and Kuiper-Belt objects have different naming conventions, and because  scattered disk  objects had  no  naming convention at the time, the names for the new primary and satellite remained unofficial. [13]

Finally the  International Astronomical Union  declared [14]  that Pluto and 2003 UB 313  were not planets, but belonged to a new category called  dwarf planets . Then on September 6, 2006, Mike Brown and his team [15]  recognized that the name "Xena" was inappropriate for 2003 UB 313  and suggested to the IAU that they name it Eris, after the Greek goddess of discord and strife. They also suggested that the IAU name the satellite Dysnomia, for the Greek goddess of lawlessness and daughter of Eris. [16]  Four days later, the IAU officially named the primary Eris and named its satellite Dysnomia. [17]

At 67.7 AU from the  Sun , it is the most distant object yet discovered that has the  Sun  for a primary. At aphelion, it is far beyond the  Kuiper belt  and in what is known as the  scattered disk  of the  solar system . Because Eris is so distant from  Earth  (currently near  aphelion  and hence three times more distant than is Pluto as of 2008), it has a very long sidereal year of 557 Julian years. Its synodic year is very nearly the same as an  Earth  year.

Yet Eris is the second most reflective body in the entire solar system, reflecting about 86% of the incident sunlight. Eris is also uniformly white on its surface, whereas Pluto is a mottled brown. The discoverers believe that this is due entirely to Eris' present far-flung position (near aphelion), and point out that Eris' orbit is the most eccentric orbit of any satellite of the  Sun , except for  comets .

Brown  et al.  noted [3]  in 2005 that Eris, Dysnomia's primary, is one of three of the four brightest Kuiper belt objects that have satellites. (The other two are  Pluto  and 2003 EL 61 .) The fourth, 2005 FY 9 , has no satellite that Earth-based telescopes can presently detect. Most Kuiper belt objects  do not  have satellites, and that three of the four brightest should have satellites suggests that their origins were significantly different from those of other Kuiper belt objects.

Brown states [6]  that the near-circular orbit of Dysnomia about Eris actually is consistent with Dysnomia's origin as the result of a collision between Eris and another object. But no astronomer has ever explained how such a collision would leave an object in a nearly circular orbit about its primary.

Eris has one known satellite, a tiny moon called  Dysnomia . In classical  mythology , Dysnomia is the name given to Eris' daughter, who is a symbol of actual lawlessness.

The  Hubble Space Telescope  and the Keck Observatory are the first two telescopes to observe the Eridian system. No deep-space missions are planned.