Will  atheism  ever disappear?

Religion and doubt are mainstays of the human condition and until the events of the Book of Revelation unfold, atheism will probably never disappear.

The Daily Mail  reported about Britain's influential broadcaster the BBC:

The new research has been seized on by critics who accuse the Corporation of bias against Christianity and marginalising the faith in its output.

The survey found that just 22.5 per cent of all staff professed to be Christians. [2]

Yet, even the BBC conceded in an article entitled  Will Religion Ever Disappear? : "For all of these reasons – psychological, neurological, historical, cultural and logistical – experts guess that religion will probably never go away". [3]

At the same time, none of this prevents atheism from shrinking in terms of its percentage of adherents in the world.  In fact, it has been doing so for the last 40 plus years.

On July 24, 2013,  CNS News  reported:

On December 23, 2012, Professor  Eric Kaufmann  who teaches at Birbeck College, University of London wrote:

On the other hand, the secular West and East Asia has very low fertility and a rapidly aging population... In the coming decades, the developed world's demand for workers to pay its pensions and work in its service sector will soar alongside the booming supply of young people in the third world. Ergo, we can expect significant immigration to the secular West which will import religious revival on the back of ethnic change. In addition, those with religious beliefs tend to have higher birth rates than the secular population, with fundamentalists having far larger families. The epicentre of these trends will be in immigration gateway cities like New York (a third white), Amsterdam (half Dutch), Los Angeles (28% white), and London, 45% white British.
 [5]

Kaufmann told a secular audience in Australia: "The trends that are happening worldwide inevitably in an age of globalization are going to affect us." [6]

See also:

See also:  Global Christianity

Christianity  is the world's largest religion and it has seen tremendous growth over its 2000 year history. [8]  Christianity has recently seen explosive growth outside the  Western World . [9]  In 2000, there were twice as many non-Western Christians as Western Christians. [10]   In 2005, there were four times as many non-Western Christians as there were  Western World  Christians. [11]  There are now more non-Western missionaries than Western missionaries. [12]

In 2012, Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary (GCTS) reported that every day there are 800 less  atheists  per day, 1,100 less non-religious ( agnostic ) people per day and 83,000 more people professing to be Christians per day. [13] [14]

In 2011, the  American Spectator  declared concerning research published in the  International Bulletin of Missionary Research :

Global biblical  creationism  and creationism is growing. See:  Global creationism is growing  and  Global creationism

The public schools play a key role in atheist/evolutionary indoctrination (see:  Atheist indoctrination ).

Debt laden and aging  Western World  countries will increasingly privatize education as it is more cost effective. [17]   Private religious schools will grow in numbers. In addition, homeschooling will increase.  Belgium  already gives vouchers for education and parents can send their children to private or public schools. [18]

American government run public schools are increasingly facing budget cuts and there is growing criticism of public schools. Vouchers for private schools (including religious schools) and charter schools are increasingly being discussed and legislators are introducing and passing school choice bills. [19]  Of course, constrained public school budgets includes constrained school legal budgets so many schools will be less able to engage in frivolous/unwarranted legal suits constraining religious free speech in their schools.

In many countries today, young people graduating from universities/colleges have high unemployment and a significant part of the problem is that higher education is not adequately preparing them to be productive members of society. Unsurprisingly, there appears to be a higher education bubble that will burst. [20]  The   Wall Street Journal  reported in 2013 that the percentage of Americans going to college has been decreasing for 3 years in the USA. [21]  Also, college is clearly not delivering the goods in terms of intellectual development for a large percentage of its students. An American study found that forty-five percent of students achieved no significant improvement in their critical thinking, reasoning or writing skills during the first two years of college. After four years, 36 percent displayed no significant increases in these so-called "higher order" thinking skills. [22]  Students, particularly those who made poor curriculum choices, are increasingly angry that college does not adequately prepare them for the marketplace and leaves them with a pile of debt. [23]

One of the turning points of WWII was the Battle of the Bulge. The German  evolutionary racists  could not supply their tanks with fuel which was key factor in their loss of this key battle.  Darwinism is a key ideological supply line of atheism.

See also:

Jim Mastin in his sermon on Romans  14 : 1-12 declared:

Isaiah 45:23 says, “The Word has gone out of my mouth in righteousness and shall not return, that to me every knee shall bow.”

Philippians 2:9-11 reads, “Therefore God has highly exalted Him and given Him the name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those in heaven, and those on earth, and of those under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.”

Not just some knees, but all knees!

Reach down and touch your knee – that knee will one day bow in complete and total submission to Christ or to God.

Saved knees shall bow

Unsaved knees shall bow

Adult knees shall bow

Teen knees shall bow

Children’s knees shall bow

Rich knees shall bow

Poor knees shall bow

Old knees shall bow

Young knees shall bow

Religious knees shall bow

Atheist knees shall bow... [24]

For more information, please see:  Christianity and its margin of victory over atheism