The unanimous declaration of all those who care about life, liberty, integrity and in the name of the values the conservative people of the United States hold dear

When, in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to break their connection with the deceit and oppression of the other, and to assume the rights of God's nature to be free from such an injustice, it is a matter of respect for our cause that we explain the many reasons for our separation from the liberal tyranny.

We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men were created equal, not in the manger, but in the womb. They are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, among these are Life, liberty and the pursuit, not the guarantee of happiness. That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, not among superdelegates or tyrannical bigshots in a white dome, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed. That whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, including peddling in socialist thought and other dangerous ideologies, it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government, laying its foundation on such principles as by Divine Institution and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; as the progressives believe and accordingly all experience hath shewn, that mankind are more disposed to suffer for the future in traditionalism than enjoy the present in progressivism, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and usurpations by the leftists, pursuing invariably the same Object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, by Hollywood values and the compromise of the rights listed above, It is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such Government, and to provide new Guards for their future security. Such has been the patient sufferance of these conservatives under eight long years of misery under Obama and the degeneration of many men over the centuries; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former Systems of Government. The history of the present Queen of Liberalism Hillary Clinton is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny of lies and destruction over these States. To prove this, let Facts be submitted to a candid world.

She has put our safety at risk by leaving private information on a personal, underprotected email server. [1]

She helped terrorists destroy an embassy in Benghazi by pulling security, allowing four Americans to die.

She aided the liberal, corrupt IRS to unfairly audit conservative groups for not agreeing with their beliefs.

She helped to cover up the fornicating activities of her husband, the then-President of the United States.

She attempted to vandalize and steal from the White House when leaving office in 2001.

She was involved in the mysterious death of Vince Foster, who knew much about her scandals, and likely covered it up.

She sold high-tech secrets to top Chinese tech companies in exchange for campaign donations to Bill Clinton's 1996 campaign.

She fired the White House travel staff and replaced them with cronies like friends and family.

She was one of the main suspects of the Whitewater investigation, which highlighted the Clinton's illicit business practices.

She had said multiple times that she landed under sniper fire in Bosnia, which turned out to be a complete lie.

She claimed that billing records from her days at a law firm during the Watergate scandal were "missing," when in actuality, they existed, and showed she met with key players in the scandal.

Her husband pardoned many people at the end of her campaign, including donors. Some also had given money to Hillary's brothers.

Bill Clinton had imposed many favorable policies toward Tyson Foods, where Hillary had invested in the cattle futures trade. Bill's policies helped result in a 100,000 dollar return for the Queen.

It has been uncovered that Hillary may have been involved in imprisonment, intimidation, and even murder of those who failed to comply with Bill's administration, besides the Vince Foster affair.

She had been influenced as a youth by radical socialist Saul Alinsky, and incorporated his teachings into her policies.

She had laughed about defending a child rapist in court during a lie inspector test in 1975, unmoved by his disgusting crimes.

She had accepted donations from foreign countries like Iran to her charitable foundation while she was Secretary of State. She later supported the Iranian nuclear deal.

Her foundation had also filed faulty/misleading tax and financial forms to the level of fraud.

She was eventually fired from her position as a lawyer during Watergate, her boss calling her an "...unethical, dishonest lawyer.." [1]

In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the most humble terms: Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury. She shows an extreme disinterest in giving up her power and fails to have any regard for the values of the free State. A Princess whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

Nor have We been wanting in attentions to our liberal brethren. We have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us in their awful values and enslaving ideals. We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here, and that our country was founded on the block of stone of conservatism, not the shifting sands of the liberals. We have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpations they hold dear, which, would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence. They too have been deaf since birth to the voice of justice and of consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our Separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in our cultural and economic War, in our hope for Peace, Friends.

We, therefore, the conservative Representatives of the united States of America, in General Congress, Assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the Name, and by Authority of the good People of this country, solemnly publish and declare, That these United States are, and of Right ought to be Free and Independent from the curse of the left-wing; that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to the Clintonian Crown, and that all political connection between them and the State of our Socialist and mistaken brethren, is and ought to be totally dissolved; and that as a Free and Independent People, they have full Power to levy our peculiar and cold War, conclude Peace, contract Alliances with the like-minded, establish a new order of freedom and liberty, and to do all other Acts and Things which a free and Independent People may of right do. And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other in this battle against the ranks of the cultural and economic Marxists, our Lives, our Fortunes and our sacred Honor.