Richard Dawkins  said in an interview, "What’s to prevent us from saying  Hitler  wasn’t right? I mean, that is a genuinely difficult question..." [1]

The interviewer wrote, regarding the Hitler comment, "I was stupefied. He had readily conceded that his own  philosophical  position did not offer a rational basis for moral judgments. His intellectual honesty was refreshing, if somewhat disturbing on this point." [1]

About 12 million perished during the  Holocaust  due to brutal  Nazi  policies and Richard Dawkins finds it difficult question on whether Hitler was wrong or right in what he did? [2]  The torture, mistreatment, disease breeding conditions, gruesome experiments on human beings, and overwork were horrendous in concentration camps. [3] [4] [5]

Adolf Hitler  wrote the following  evolutionary racist  material in his work  Mein Kampf :

Charles Darwin  himself was a racist and white supremacist.  He predicted mass genocide claiming:

For more information see:   Josef Mengele

Josef Mengele  (1911 - 1979) was a  German   physician  and researcher who perpetrated the  Holocaust  in the  Auschwitz  death camp. Mengele had obtained a  Ph.D.  based on the study of  racial  differences in the anatomy of the jaw. He was one of the greatest supporters of  Nazi  theories of racial superiority with questionable research claims. Dr. Josef Mengele's  evolutionary  thinking was in accordance with  social Darwinist  theories that  Adolph Hitler  and a number of  German  academics found appealing. [8]   Mengele studied under the leading proponents the "unworthy life"  branch of evolutionary thought. [9]   Mengele strongly supported the murder of the physically and mentally disabled.  Dr. Mengele was one of the most notorious individuals associated with  Nazi  death camps and the  Holocaust . [10]   Dr. Mengele obtained a infamous reputation due to his experiments on twins while at  Auschwitz -Birkenau. [11]    He was known as the "Angel of Death."

He performed experiments on humans in the  concentration camps  attempting to prove that disease was the product of  racial inferiority  and in order to  genetically engineer  a new species, which was the aim of his organization, the Frankfurt based Institute of Hereditary Biology and Racial Hygiene. He amputated healthy limbs and performed other unusual operations on prisoners.