The  Flag Desecration Amendment  is a proposed amendment to the  United States Constitution  that would prohibit the desecration of the US flag. The text in the amendment states:

It is the first proposed amendment since the  Eighteenth Amendment  that would restrict freedoms in the  United States Constitution  and the first in US history that would amend the  Bill of Rights '  First Amendment 's  freedom of speech  protection.

The issue of flag desecration came to front of politics when in 1984, Gregory Lee Johnson was arrested for burning an American flag during the Republican National Convention in  Dallas, Texas . He was charged under Texas' law prohibiting the desecration of respected objects. After his conviction, he appealed in the Court of Appeals for the Fifth District of Texas, but lost. He then appealed in the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, which he won on the grounds that flag burning in protest was protected speech under the  United States Constitution . The State of Texas then appealed to the  Supreme Court of the United States , in  Texas v. Johnson . By a 5-4 vote, with majority opinion including Justices  William Brennan ,  Thurgood Marshall ,  Harry Blackmun , the conservative  Antonin Scalia , and a concurrence by  Anthony Kennedy , the Court upheld the right to desecrate the flag in protest found by the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals. Justice  William Brennan  wrote the opinion for the Court, stating, “If there is a bedrock principle underlying the First Amendment, it is that the government may not prohibit the expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea itself offensive or disagreeable.” [1]

The ruling overturned the flag desecration laws in 48 states. Shortly afterward, Congress passed the  Flag Protection Act  in response to the ruling. The text of the Act read:

The Act, however, was overruled in another Supreme Court ruling known as  United States v. Eichman  (1990), again by a 5-4 decision, protecting flag desecration in protest as an act of free speech.

Years later, the  104th Congress  attempted to amend the Constitution to prohibit flag desecration by introducing the amendment in the  House  and  Senate . In the first attempt, in 1995 the amendment passed the House 312-120, but failed in the Senate 63-36, falling four votes short of the necessary amount. In 1997, the amendment passed the House 310-114, but was not brought up for a vote in the Senate. In 1999, it passed the House 305-124, but failed again in the Senate 63-37. In 2001 and 2003, it passed the House 298-125 and 300-125 respectively, but was not brought up for a vote in the Senate. The  109th Congress  was the closest that Congress got to passing the amendment, with the House voting 286-130, but falling one vote short in the Senate, 66-34. [3]  Overall, the support in the Senate is slightly increasing, but support in the House in on the decline.

The Flag Desecration Amendment is supported by conservatives and lobby groups thereof. Some arguments for the Flag Desecration Amendment include:

Arguments against the Flag Desecration Amendment are made by liberals, several veterans, [4]  and other groups thereof. Some arguments made are:

According to polls recorded by the Pew Research Center from other sources, an overwhelming majority of people believe that burning the flag should be a criminal offense, but the majority disappears when the question asked is whether flag burning should be illegal  as a form of protest , to which 45% responded "Yes," and 54% responded "No." [8]  The support is not as high as it was when the Amendment was first introduced and public support continues to decline today. [9]

A couple of quotes made by those who support and oppose the Flag Desecration Amendment include:

"I was asked this afternoon by a large body of media: Is [banning flag desecration] the most important thing the Senate could be doing at this time? I can tell you, you're darn right it is."  -  Orrin Hatch ,  Republican  Senator of  Utah [10] [11]

"In 1989 the Supreme Court, in response to a flag burning by a communist, amended the Constitution by inserting flag burning into the Bill of Rights. Their decision took away a fundamental right of the American people, a right we possessed since our birth as a nation, the right to protect our flag. We believe that decision was an egregious error and distorted our Constitution. We do not believe the freedom to burn the American flag is a legacy of the freedoms bestowed on us by Madison and Jefferson and Washington and the other architects of our Constitution. To distort the work of these great men, to put flag burning side by side with pornography as protected speech, is outrageous. Since 1994 the Citizens Flag Alliance has petitioned the Congress for the proposed amendment. With the help of millions of people and an overwhelming majority of U.S. lawmakers, it has come within one vote of congressional approval. With full determination to meet its objective of returning to the people their right to protect the flag of the United States, the Citizens Flag Alliance will continue its pursuit of the amendment in the 110th Congress. We encourage those who support this objective to take their concerns to all federally elected officials, urging them to adopt the amendment and let the people decide, through the process of ratification, the fate of their flag."  -  Citizens Flag Alliance 's reaction to the failed 2006 vote for the Amendment in the Senate [12]  (Note: there is no fundamental right to protect the flag written in the  United States Constitution )

"As Richard Savage of Bloomington, Illinois wrote to me, 'I am a Vietnam veteran and Republican. . . . Those who would burn the flag destroy the symbol of freedom, but amending the Constitution would destroy part of freedom itself.' Mr. Savage is right, which is why I will vote against this amendment."  -  Barack Obama ,  Democratic  Senator of  Illinois [13]

"The First Amendment exists to insure that freedom of speech and expression applies not just to that with which we agree or disagree, but also that which we find outrageous. I would not amend that great shield of democracy to hammer a few miscreants. The flag will still be flying proudly long after they have slunk away." [14]  -  Colin Powell , Joint Chiefs of Staff

"That proves that I am right. In my country we are not afraid of freedom, even if it means that people disagree with us."  - James H. Warner, former Marine during the Vietnam War, after being shown by  Viet Cong  interrogators a photo of Americans burning a flag and being told that his cause was wrong [6]

"Real patriotism cannot be coerced. Our freedom to speak was attacked — not our flag. The former, not the latter, needs the protection of our Constitution and our laws."  - Former Senator  Bob Kerrey ,  Democrat  of  Nebraska [15]