Formula One , also known as  Formula 1  or  F1  and officially as the  FIA Formula One World Championship  is the highest class of single-seater  auto racing  sanctioned by the  Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile  (FIA). Formula One is often considered the pinnacle of  automobile   racing . The cars are extremely fast with speeds topping 320 kph, although it is their cornering and braking performance that sets Formula 1 apart as the highest class of car racing. The Formula One World Championship is held every year on racing tracks around the globe. There are effectively two championships being contested - the World Drivers Championship is given to the winning driver, but the teams also compete in the Manufacturer's Championship. The 2014 Driver's World Champion is British racer Lewis Hamilton, while the Constructor's Champions are the  German  team known as the Mercedes AMG Petronas Formula One Team.

The teams for the 2013 season were;

Formula One racing has been involved in several controversies.  Texas  gave $300 million to  Bernie Eccelstone  to host the  US Grand Prix  in  Austin ,  Texas  at the  Circuit of the Americas  over the next 10 years.

The state of  New Jersey  also gave Ecclestone $300 million so it can host the  New Jersey Grand Prix  at  West New York  over the next 10 years, starting in 2013. There have been a number of reports that the 2013  American Grand Prix  will not happen due to lack of payment of race fees to Bernie Eccelstone and lack of preparation. However New Jersey Governor  Chris Christie  has said that all is on track and that the required fees have been paid, however this conflicts with what is widely being reported in the  European  Press.

Another controversy was the incident involving the former head of the FIA, Max Mosley. The now defunct liberal gossip newspaper,  News of the World , published a story in which they accused Mosley of organizing and participating in a number of immoral and  Nazi -themed events. These accusations caused a lot of concern within certain national sporting bodies and greatly damaged the road safety campaign that was being organised to save lives in developing countries as well as driving a number of key potential sponsors away from the sport. Mosley sued the newspaper for breach of confidentiality regarding private matters, and was awarded 60,000 pounds in the case. The judge stated, "I see no genuine basis at all for the suggestion that the participants mocked the victims of the Holocaust. ... There was bondage, beating and domination which seem to be typical of S&M behaviour." [1]

Almost all Formula One drivers start racing Karts in club and sub-national classes between the ages of 5 and their early teens. If they show some talent and have the funding they then progress to the national and international competitions. They then progress to either Formula Renault, Formula Ford or a National Formula 3 class if they have sufficient funding and talent. Drivers then progress to Formula 3 or GP3 which costs in the region of half a million euros per season. After this the drivers go into either  World Series by Renault  or  GP2 , which can cost up to 3 million euros a season. Talented drivers also act as teams third and test drivers while they compete in these series; drivers who can bring large amounts of sponsorship money to the F1 teams are also given these roles even though they may be lacking in talent. Drivers can also get into F1 through routes such as Sports cars and touring cars (such as  V8 Supercars ) however this route is very uncommon now.

There are other, less common routes to a F1 race seat. The last driver to come to formula one via this route was Paul di Resta who won the  DTM  title for  Mercedes  and was then given a race seat in the  Mercedes -powered  Force India . Sebastian Bourdais came to Formula 1 through IndyCar, however he failed to compete and was sacked by Toro Rosso.