William Francis (Frank) Murphy  (April 13, 1890 – July 19, 1949) was a jurist and politician. Most notably, he was an  Associate Justice  of the  United States Supreme Court , the 56th  United States Attorney General  , the 35th  Governor  of  Michigan  and the 59th  Mayor  of  Detroit, Michigan . He was also the Governor-General of the Philippines, taught at the  University of Detroit Mercy  for five years and served as a captain in occupied Germany during  World War I . [1]

During his tenure as attorney general, he enacted the first  civil rights  law in the  Justice Department . [2]

Murphy became Mayor of Detroit during the first years of the  Great Depression . [1] [3]  He combatted this reality by convincing industrialists to turn over their factories to be converted to boardinghouses for the homeless, and allowed delinquent property owners to pay their taxes over a seven-year period. [1]  He also notably set up apple vendors - where the elderly or handicapped bought apples for 2 cents, and then resold them for a nickel - at the program’s peak, 650 Detroiters were supporting their families by selling apples. [1]

Murphy organized meetings of mayors from across the nation - this would lead to the establishment of the U.S. Conference of Mayors - he would be their first president; [3] [4]  this group convinced  Congress  to provide direct federal aid to the cities. [1]

As a reward for campaigning for  Franklin Roosevelt , Murphy was appointed to be Governor-General of the  Philippines . There he attempted to guide the Philippines’ transition from a territory to a commonwealth. [1] [5]  He enacted  minimum wage  laws and supported women's  suffrage . [5]  Murphy was a popular leader - in 1935 he became the first United States High Commissioner of the Philippines. [6]

Murphy returned from the Philippines to run against  incumbent   Frank Fitzgerald  for the Governorship of Michigan - he won by a narrow margin. When Murphy took office, more than 100,000  General Motors  workers were in the third day of a sit-down strike in Flint. [3]  On January 11, 1937, policed stormed the protestors, leading to a brawl that ended with 27 injured. [1]  Murphy called in the  National Guard  to protect the protestors, ignored a court order to remove the strikers and served as a mediator between the  United Auto Workers  and GM; on February 11 he announced an agreement had been made. [1]

Murphy would later do away with the  spoils system  and install a  civil service  system. [1]  He lost his re-election bid to the same man he had defeated - Frank Fitzgerald.

Murphy served as a United States attorney for the Eastern District of Michigan from 1919-1922. He won all but one of the cases he prosecuted. [1]

From 1923 to 1940, Murphy served as a Recorder's Court Judge. He presided over the famous Sweet murder trials - Dr. Ossian Sweet, an  African-American , had been charged with the murder of a white man who was shot outside of his home. (Sweet was acquitted after a second trial.) Gary Maveal of the University of Detroit Mercy School of Law noted that "Murphy’s fairness to the prosecution and defense was remarkable; his fairness to the defendant was unique for the times." [3]

Murphy changed the bail system so that the poor could more easily make bond and established an independent traffic court.

President Franklin Roosevelt nominated Murphy to serve as the  United States Attorney General  in 1939; there Murphy established a Civil Liberties Section in the Criminal Division of the  Department of Justice . [3]  He cracked down on  liberal  corrupt  political machines  in  Kansas City  and  Philadelphia . [1]

President Roosevelt again called Murphy to service - this time to serve on the  Supreme Court , possibly to remove the chance of Murphy challenging him in a political race. [1]

As a jurist, he was a strong advocate of  civil rights  and distrustful of government power. This view led to perhaps his best known opinion - a dissent in the case  Korematsu v. United States , which controversially held as  constitutional  the internment of Japanese-Americans during  World War II . Murphy referred to the ruling as the "legalization of racism", saying, "Racial discrimination in any form and in any degree has no justifiable part whatever in our democratic way of life ... All residents of this nation are kin in some way by blood or culture to a foreign land. Yet they are primarily and necessarily a part of the new and distinct civilization of the United States. They must accordingly be treated at all times as the heirs of the American experiment and as entitled to all the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution." [7]  Murphy also used the phrase "the ugly abyss of racism" - the first time the word " racism " was used in a Supreme Court opinion. [1]

Murphy consistently voted in upholding  First Amendment  claims. He voted with the majority to end compulsory flag saluting in schools in  West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette  and he wrote the majority opinion protecting  labor union  picketing in  Thornhill v. Alabama . [5]

In 1949 Murphy dissented in  Wolf v. Colorado  - where the majority ruled that the  Fourth Amendment  was not applicable to the states - in that evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment can be used in state trials. Murphy wrote that the opinion allowed  "lawlessness by officers of the law". [5]  In 1961, the Court would adopt Murphy's view and overturn  Wolf  in  Mapp v. Ohio , establishing the  exclusionary rule  for states. [5]

During Court recesses, Murphy's desire to be part of the war effort led him to serve as an infantry officer in Fort Benning,  Georgia . [2]

Murphy's health rapidly declined in his 50s - unable to sleep well and pain-ridden, he became addicted to Demerol and Seconal. When doctors ceased writing prescriptions for him, he purchased the drugs illegally through middlemen. In his last year on the Court he was frequently absent and frail; he ignored calls to step down. On July 19, 1949, Murphy died of a coronary thrombosis. [1]