Full Tilt! Pinball  is a  pinball   video game  developed by Cinematronics and published by Maxis in 1995. It has pre-rendered 3D graphics. There are three tables: Space Cadet, Skulduggery, and Dragon's Keep. Space Cadet would later become part of  Microsoft Windows  until  Windows Vista . On each table, there are displays on the right showing the players' score, the number of balls, the player's number, a display for various information and a table-specific image. In 1996, its sequel, Full Tilt! Pinball 2, was released. It contained three tables that were not in the original game: Mad Scientist, Alien Daze and Captain Hero.

This product is not longer included with  Microsoft   Windows   operating systems  due to problems in converting the program to 64-bit.  When adapted, the hit detection did not work properly, and although some effort was made, it could not be fixed.  Microsoft developer Raymond Chen reported that the code was largely uncommented, and no one really understood it, so they couldn't solve the hit detection problem.  He further commented that, "Heck, we couldn’t even find the collision detector!"
For this reason, it was dropped from  Windows Vista , and has not been included with newer systems presumably for the same reason. [1]  Nevertheless, it is still available at many free download sites and a variant under the name  Pinball Star  (although not related to either Microsoft or Cinematronics) is available in the Windows Store. [2]

The best known table is the Space Cadet table, which would later come with Microsoft Windows. In the setting of this table, the player is an officer in a space fleet. His goal is to complete sixteen different missions: Launch Training, Re-entryTraining, Target Practice, Science, Bug Hunt, Rescue, Alien Menace, Secret, Stray Comet, Space Radiation, Black Hole Threat, Cosmic Plague, Satellite Retrieval, Doomsday Machine, Time Warp, and Maelstrom. After he completes about three missions, he increases in rank from Cadet, Ensign, Lieutenant, Captain, Lieutenant Commander, Commander, Commodore, Admiral, and Fleet Admiral. To accept a mission, one must hit one of three "mission targets". If hit three times in a row, a fourth mission will be selected. After selecting a mission, the ball must go through the "launch ramp".

This somewhat lesser-known board uses the theme of slaying the dragon.  Various missions are given which supposedly work towards this goal, and "items" may be acquired, which either grant the player extra points (weapons), or open various avenues and areas for the ball to enter or pass through (spells and armor).