Alternate view: Neither the Septuagent nor the Masoretic Text include the definite article with reference to the word meaning beginning. But that is of no moment; ancient definite article adjectives  were not  required in all instances, as they are in modern English and the Romance languages. Hebrew, like Greek, uses definite articles for emphasis. Indefiniteness, in both these languages, is a thing that the user must make explicit, with an indefinite pronoun.

The Hebrew word  שמים  ( shamayim ) means "skies" and is in the dual number. [1]

One view: The earth is like a blank canvas, awaiting the stroke of the Master Artist. The original  Hebrew  repeats the concept of formlessness for emphasis. But though the earth  began  formless, it did not  stay  formless for long.  Gravity  gave it form almost at once.

Note that the word rendered  so  in English is the Hebrew word  ken , which means  yes.

The word rendered  heaven  could  also  be a contraction of the Hebrew  אש  (fire) and  מים  (waters), hence  fire in waters.  Had anyone sent a probe to dive under the earth's crust after the shaping and molding that took place on Day Three, he would have seen glowing pillars in an otherwise black-as-jet environment.

Concerning the sky: the ancient Hebrews believed that the sky was in fact a solid object that separated two classes of waters. Some  creation scientists  (beginning with Isaac Newton Vail in 1894) took this to mean a water-vapor canopy that protected the earth before the  Great Flood . Dr.  Walt Brown , originator of the  Hydroplate Theory , has shown that no such canopy could have held together for very long. Hence his reinterpretation of the unqualified Hebrew word  raqia  to mean the earth's crust, not the sky. (The "expanse of the skies" is the actual expanse of outer space.)

The  cosmologist   John Hartnett  holds that the expanse is not matter, but is in fact the very fabric of  space , stretched out on Day Four (see below) to the limits of the known  universe .

Note that this expanse is the expanse of the  sky , not the expanse of the  earth .

If He had made the sun and the moon earlier, they would have ruined His working of the earth's crust (see above).

Note:  The Hebrew word  behemah,  translated as "cattle," does  not  mean the common beef animal. It means any large walker, including the fearsome  Behemoth  that God describes to  Job .

(The annals of Adam)

In the day that the  L ORD   God  made the earth and the skies,

The Hebrew  תולדות  ( toledoth ) normally means "family history." Here and elsewhere, it is a direct testimony. The word  toledoth,  wherever it appears, marks a  colophon phrase  like those at the end of commonly found ancient clay tablets from the  Middle East .

The "mist" referred to here, in the imperfect tense, is the kind of mist that commonly forms in "terrariums," which are sealed displays meant to duplicate the water cycle. The original water cycle did not have rain as we know it.

The devil did deceive here by falsely telling Eve that she would become God-like. It takes a lot more than knowledge of good and evil to be God-like, but Eve did not know that, and she believed a lie.

(The annals of Noah)

In the day that  God  created man, He made him in God's likeness.

(The annals of Shem, Ham and Japheth)

Noah was a just man, and the most wholesome man of his time, and Noah walked with God.

"Pitch" usually means "ransom" and its use here prefigures the ransom that  Jesus Christ  paid for mankind. [2]

That last idiomatic phrase reflects the ancient Hebrew view of the sky as a solid object; see Genesis 1:6-8. It refers actually to the torrential rain, which came not only from rainclouds but also fell back to earth after gushing out of the subcrustal springs. See also  Hydroplate Theory  and entries for the  Galilean moons  of  Jupiter , three of which are supposed to have subcrustal oceans.

The  Hebrew   אררט  ( Urartu ) is not necessarily the name of a mountain range in eastern  Armenia , that includes a particular mountain named " Mount Ararat " in  Turkey . It could also be the  Assyrian  word for "highest."