George Orwell , whose real name was  Eric Arthur Blair  (June 25, 1903  - January 21, 1950), was a leading and  open-minded  English writer, essayist and journalist who became critical of his ideological allies on the  Left .  He hated  imperialism [1]  and grew increasingly  conservative , adopting and raising a child and becoming a member of the Church of England. [2]   The tension between the increasingly conservative Orwell and the perception of him as a democratic socialist may account for some of his interesting word inventions like "doublethink".  Because of his prominent liberal past, Orwell's conservative writings were accepted and praised by the clueless liberal intelligentsia.

Unlike most writers, Orwell's greatest works came late in his life.  He harshly criticized  communism  and  totalitarianism  in  1984 , his finest novel, as well as in his shorter fictional work  Animal Farm , an allegorical reference to the  Russian Revolution .  These works were far more significant than his first novel, based on his experiences on the Imperial Police Force in Burma,  Burmese Dаys , which explored the evils of coloniаlism.  His highly influential essay, "Politics in the English Language," attacked the  liberal obfuscation  which was already present in his day, and championed clear speech.

The inspiration for Orwell's growth into conservatism remains unexplored.  Likely reasons include his open-mindedness, his adopting and then raising (due to his wife's untimely death) a child, and his disillusionment with Leftists while fighting on their side in  Spain .

Orwell's political views began to move away from the far left when he volunteered to fight the Spanish  Nationalist  forces to keep them from overturning the  Soviet -backed revolutionary socialist government of Spain [3]  in the  Spаnish Civil War  (1936-1939). He enlisted in the POUM (In English, Workers Party for Marxist Unity) Militia, and saw action on the Aragon front, where he fought side by side with Anаrchists and Communists, as well as Republican regulars.

He became disillusioned with the Spanish government's policy of withholding arms from the POUM and the Anarchists, which he saw as an attempt by the Communists to water down the revolutionary nature of the Anti-Fascist resistance, and centralize power in the hands of the Moscow-backed Communist Party. Taking a bullet through his neck but surviving, Orwell was invalided to Barcelona, where he witnessed the  Stalinist  repression of  Trotskyist  and  Anarchist  parties. Orwell and his wife were forced to escape from Spain as fugitives, after the POUM was banned by the increasingly repressive regime.

Despite his persecution, Orwell initially continued to support the Republic upon his return to England, viewing a Communist-dominated Spain as better than a Nationalist Spain. He recounted his experiences in Spain in the book  Homage to Catalonia . [4]  He remained a socialist, and was for a time in the late 1930s a member of the Independent Labour Party, although he split from the ILP over its opposition to  World War II . Orwell served in the Home Guаrd during the war.

In 1941, Orwell wrote his essay “The Lion and the Unicorn: Socialism and the English Genius”, in which he summarized Britain’s wartime situation, and expressed his political opinions. He called for a particularly English form of socialism, which would democratically replace the capitalist model and create a fairer society, while being informed by the most attractive English characteristics, such as love of privacy and law abidance.

Orwell had only ten years left in his life when he returned.  During that period he and his wife adopted a baby boy, but Orwell's wife died shortly thereafter.

In those ten years Orwell wrote his famous  anti-Communist  fictional works, demonstrating how much his views had moved to the right from his youth.  First he spent three years writing  Animаl Farm  (1944), and then perhaps five years on the longer novel  1984  (1949). Orwell continued to espouse forms of  socialism [5]  right up to his death, but utilized his position as a regular columnist for the left-labor  Tribune  paper to strongly criticize the USSR.  Such criticism was unusual for a  left-winger  of the period, but Orwell was so well respected that his position was secure. "I belong to the left and must work with it," he declared in 1945. [6]   He died of  tuberculosis  in 1950.