George Walker Bush  (born New Haven,  Connecticut  1946) was the Governor of  Texas  (1995-2000) and served as the 43rd  President of the United States of America  from 2001 to 2009. Campaigning on a theme of "compassionate conservatism"  and promising "to restore honor and dignity" to the office of President after the Clinton years, [1]  he won the office by a narrow margin in the decisive State of  Florida  in the  2000 Presidential election . Legal challenges to the certified vote count went all the way to the  U.S. Supreme Court  when liberal Democratic contender  Al Gore  contested the outcome for weeks until the Supreme Court case  Bush v. Gore .

In the  2004 Presidential election  Bush won re-election, helped in part by a 300,000 vote victory (5%) in the State of Florida, where the outcome had been so close in 2000. [2]   Leftist  Democratic candidate  John Kerry  conceded defeat the day after the election.

Bush's presidency was defined by  foreign policy  because of the  September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks , which eventually resulted in the attacks onto the countries of  Iraq  and  Afghanistan . Bush named two conservatives to the Supreme Court. He reformed K12 education with a major new program,  No Child Left Behind , and pushed a series of major tax cuts through Congress. Conservatives cheered. All this happened in his first term, aiding his easy reelection.  His performance in dealing with  Hurricane Katrina  in 2005 were widely ridiculed, though some Republicans argued that local Democrats did an even worse job.

As the  Financial Crisis of 2008  smashed into the banking system and the nation plunged into the  Recession of 2008 , Bush responded by proposing a massive aid program of $700 billion to banks, and loan guarantees amounting to the trillions of dollars. Conservatives were dismayed as he proposed a traditional  Keynesian   stimulus  which Democrats lauded. Above all, he made one of the most dramatic federal interventions in American history by his aid to the financial system.  Bruce Bartlett, a Republican economist, says, "Bush clearly is not a Reaganite or "small 'c' conservative."

Conservatives and  libertarians  have criticized Bush for greatly increased domestic spending, creating a new entitlement program for prescription drugs, failing to veto a single bill, and expanding both the size and scope of government. The man made extremely difficult decisions under extraordinary circumstances. Unlike any president before him, he was subjected to an all out attack by the terrorist group Al-Qaeda. Bush's last year in office was a combination of Democrat  Alinsky  tactics and abandonment by his own Republican party. Lobbyists and Congress contributed greatly to the collapsing financial markets. Mistakes, questionable interests, Federal Reserve lack of transparency, Liberal Media, Unions, Homeland Security and you understand why the Bush team was to falter, they were in over their heads. Bush is a man with convictions that didn't cower from protecting America and putting America first. [3]  George would engineer two government rebate checks, giving back to the people. Average unemployment over eight-years of the  Bush Administration  was 5.3%. [4]  and he can be credited for having the most  pro-life  policies of any president.

Bush declared his candidacy for Governor of Texas in 1994. He defeated incumbent  Democrat  Governor  Ann Richards  53.5 percent to 45.9 percent. Bush advocated and signed the two largest tax cuts to date in Texas history, totaling over $3 billion. [6]  He supported and signed legislation emphasizing local control of  schools , higher standards, and a revised curriculum. Bush was easily reelected Governor in 1998.

For a more detailed treatment, see  United States presidential election, 2000 .

The Republican nominee for the 2000 Presidential nomination came down to Texas Governor George W. Bush and  Arizona  Senator  John McCain , a maverick Republican and ex-POW. Most social conservatives endorsed Bush. Despite early primary wins in  New Hampshire  and  Michigan  for McCain, Bush eventually won after sweeping 9 out of the 13 states on Super Tuesday. McCain withdrew in March after a bitter primary fight. Bush then chose former U.S. Defense Secretary  Richard Cheney  as his running mate. Vice President  Al Gore  was the Democratic nominee. Consumer Advocate  Ralph Nader , a strong supporter of  environmental  protection and critic of large corporations entered the race in the  green party .

In a historically close race, Gore edged out Bush in the popular vote 48.4 percent to 47.9 percent. However, Bush won the majority of electoral votes, 271 to 266, because of Bush's victory in Florida, winning its 25 electoral votes that both candidates desperately needed. The race in Florida was so close that state law required a recount of the ballots. There were, however, thousands of thrown out ballots that were discredited because the counting machines could not discern them. After the machine recounts still showed Bush ahead, Gore asked for a hand recount of ballots in counties that favored Democrats. On November 26, Florida officials certified that Bush won the state of Florida by 537 votes. Gore conceded December 13.

For a more detailed treatment, see  United States presidential election, 2004 .

In President Bush's reelection campaign in 2004,  national security , the invasion of Iraq and social issues dominated the campaign. The Democrat nominee was  Massachusetts  Senator  John Kerry . Bush won the popular vote, 51% to 48%. With 120 million Americans voting (15 million more than in 2000) Bush received more votes than any other presidential candidate in history. Among the swing states, Kerry took  Pennsylvania ,  New Hampshire ,  Michigan ,  Minnesota ,  Wisconsin  and  Oregon , while Bush took  Ohio ,  Florida ,  Missouri ,  Iowa ,  Colorado ,  New Mexico , and  Nevada . [7]

Republicans also picked up seats in both chambers of  Congress .

In foreign and security areas, his terms included the 9-11 terrorist attack, the passage of the PATRIOT Act, the invasion of Afghanistan (2001–present) and Iraq (2003-present), the expansion of NATO to the Russian border, financial aid to fight disease (especially AIDS) in Africa, and improved relations with India. The Iraq war was the focus of intense partisan debate.

The 2002 midterm election saw a GOP gain of seats in the House of Representatives and governorships, However the 2006 elections showed sharp GOP losses across the board, and loss of control of the House for the first time since its capture in 1994. He played a minor role in the 2008 election, which the GOP lost.

In domestic legislation he partnered with Sen.  Ted Kennedy  to pass the No Child Left Behind education act, and tried—but failed—to pass immigration reform. Early on he secured large-scale tax cuts, which helped the economic recovery in 2002. The boom (and later collapse) in real estate boosted the economy then pulled it down. Liberals criticized his handling of the 2005 Hurricane Katrina relief, and the dismissals of U.S. Attorneys for political reasons. His proposed "Vision for Space Exploration" went nowhere, and he failed to make headway in Social Security reform. Conservatives hailed his appointments of conservatives to the Supreme Court at the time

The September 11, 2001 Terrorist Attacks resulted in George W. Bush becoming a self-described war time President. On that morning President Bush had traveled to Booker Elementary School in Sarasota,  Florida  to promote his  educational  agenda; when 19 Islamic terrorists connected with  Al-Qaeda  hijacked four commercial airplanes. Two of them crashed into the  World Trade Center  in  New York City , the third in  The Pentagon  in  Washington, D.C.  and the fourth in Somerset County,  Pennsylvania , after passengers of the flight successfully stopped the hijackers from hitting Washington D.C., possibly the  White House  or  Capital . As a result, over 3,000 Americans were killed, and over 6,000 injured, the largest terrorist attack in American history. After  White House  Chief of Staff  Andrew Card  had whispered in the President's ear that the United States was under attack, President Bush addressed the public in the Booker school's media center, saying a brief four paragraph statement that "Terrorism against our nation will not stand. This will not stand." Which was a formation that President George H. W. Bush used in August 1990 after  Iraq  invaded  Kuwait . President Bush would later say that "This is my reminder of lives that ended, and a task that does not end. . . . I will not yield; I will not rest; I will not relent in waging this struggle for freedom and security for the American people."

On October 5, a new  anthrax  scare from terrorists began. Anthrax—a deadly bacteria—had been sent in the mail to news organizations in New York City and Washington, D.C. and  Senate  Majority Leader  Tom Daschle 's office. The FBI investigated the anthrax attacks, although no suspects were identified.

Afghanistan housed and protected al-Qaeda as it planned the 9-11 attacks.  It then refused to turn over al-Qaeda leaders. With UN and NATO approval, Bush went to war to overthrow the Taliban. On October 7, 2001, he ordered bombing of al-Qaeda's camps and the  Taliban 's military forces in Afghanistan. "We will not waver, we will not tire, we will not falter, we will not fail, freedom will prevail", President Bush explained. The attack quickly shattered the  Taliban 's defenses, and by early December the Taliban regime had collapsed. The United States, its allies and the UN then helped Afghanistan create a new government under  Hamid Karzai . By March 2002, the Taliban and al-Qaeda were beginning to regroup again in the mountain's of the  Pakistan  border. President Bush responded by launching Operation Anaconda, where Al-Qaeda troops were defeated.  Al-Qaeda was largely destroyed, but the Taliban rebuilt using secure sanctuaries in Pakistan from which it launched terror attacks inside Afghanistan (and inside Pakistan as well). [9]

As a candidate in 2008 Obama criticized Bush for neglecting Afghanistan, and tripled the number of American troops from 31,000 when Bush left office to over 100,000 in early 2010

Democrats wanted the focus of the 2002 mid term elections to be on the  economy , which was growing slowly after the September 11th terrorist attacks. However, because Congress voted to authorized military force in Iraq in mid-October, national security was the top issue. Republicans increased their majority in the  U.S. House of Representatives  and took back control of the  United States Senate .

In his famous January 2002 State of the Union speech, President Bush declared an "Axis of Evil" made up of  Iraq ,  Iran , and  North Korea , countries that posed a grave threat to the world and were suspected of supporting terrorism. Considering it a more dangerous and urgent threat then North Korea, President Bush began putting pressure on Iraq throughout 2002 for a regime  change . Iraq's dictator  Saddam Hussein  had used chemical weapons against Iran and the Kurds, an ethnic minority in Iraq. Considering that Iraq may had been building Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD's) and was a threat to the United States and its allies, On September 12, 2002 President Bush tried to gain U.N. support for a U.S. led invasion of Iraq and asked for a resolution that Iraq gave up its Weapons of Mass Destruction. While the U.N. Security Council approved a resolution that demanded Saddam Hussein declare all of its WMD's, stop supporting terrorism and oppressing his people, Congress authorized the use of military force against Iraq. The United States,  Great Britain  and about 30 other countries began to prepare for war.

On January 30, 2005 Iraq had it's first general election since the liberation. They voted for a 275-member Iraqi National Assembly which later drafted a constitution. In December Iraq elected a permanent 275-member Council of Representatives. There were low levels of violence during the voting. In a show down with Congressional Democrats after taking control of the  U.S. House of Representatives  and  Senate  in the 2006 Congressional Midterm elections, Democrats retreated on their pledge to end the  Iraq War  early and bring the troops home. Democrats had threatened to withhold funding for the troops unless a date certain for withdrawal was set.   After the final vote, 280-142 in the House and 80-14 in the Senate, the anti-War movement was defeated.  The deal cut with Democratic leaders in exchange for their acquiescing to fund the troops calls for the President to sign legislation raising the  minimum wage . [10]   One commentator remarked, "Despite all the talk of standing up to George W. Bush, despite all the bravado about taking control of Congress, despite the so-called mandate to change direction, Democrats caved....They claim that the majority of Americans are with them on the Iraq issue, but...President Bush, at the weakest moment of his presidency, still bested his Democratic rivals."  [11]

On January 23, 2007 President Bush ordered an additional 30,000 troops to Iraq.

The surge was opposed by a majority of the United States Congress. However, it has resulted in significantly reduced sectarian violence. According to U.S. Central Command  General   David Petraeus , violence in Iraq by December 2008 was at a 5-year low. [13]

President Bush has worked to stop the spread of the  HIV/AIDS  epidemic in  Africa . In the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) $15 billion over five years (2003–2008) was spent on fighting global HIV/AIDS and improving treatment.

Upon gaining office in 2001, Bush signed into law a $1.35 trillion cut in taxes over 10 years. The plan included the objectives of doubling the child tax credit from $500 to $1,000, reducing the tax penalty on  married couples  and fully repealing the  tax on estates . A  United States Senate  Finance Committee Report estimated that with all the planned reductions fully phased in, the average family of four making $50,000 would save $1,825 per year. [14]

During this same time period, spending mandated by Congress has also increased by more than 29% in inflation-adjusted dollars, representing an 11.4% increase in federal spending as a percentage of  GDP . This spending has doubled the federal debt, increasing it from 58% to 66% of GDP. Defense spending increased 61%, and non-defense by 23% during the eight years since 2000.  The largest non-defense spending increase has been for federally-funded medical expenses, at 54 percent. [16]  In total, Bush has increased government expenditures by the largest percentage of any president since Lyndon Johnson. [17]

Bush presided over a period of unreal economic growth that reflected a bubble that burst in 2008. The  housing bubble  allowed people to cash in the rising value of houses; low interest rates that led to massive borrowing. Money flowed into the U.S. from around the world. The stock market that hit a record high in 2007, then plunged relentlessly downward, losing $8 trillion in value in 2008. Unemployment hit an all-time low in March 2007, but started rapidly increasing after January 2008. Bush signed into law a minimum wage increase, one of the platforms for the Democrats in the 2006 Congressional elections, after the House and Senate included Bush's request of provisions for small-business tax breaks. [18] [19]  Tax policies have been favorable to reducing the  Capital Gains Tax , with a subsequent surge in investment.

See  Financial Crisis of 2008  and  Recession of 2008 ,

The  socialist   Fair Minimum Wage Act of 2007  was signed by Bush into law on April 25, 2009 as a rider to the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007, despite conservative opposition. [20]   This measure hurt businesses and decreased America's competitiveness in the global marketplace.

After the death of Chief Justice  William Rehnquist , President Bush nominated U.S. Court of Appeals Judge  John Roberts  to fill the vacancy. He was confirmed on September 29, 2005 by a 78-22 vote. To replace the retiring Associate Justice  Sandra Day O'Connor  Bush nominated Judge  Samuel Alito , after his original nomination of Chief White House Council  Harriet Miers  was withdrawn because of widespread opposition due to lack of experience. After an unsuccessful filibuster attempt from  Senate   liberals , Alito was confirmed on a 58-42 vote and was sworn in on January 31, 2006. [21]

In March 2008, Bush endorsed his one-time rival  John McCain  as the Republican candidate for President of the United States. However, due to the President's declining popularity in polls, McCain distanced himself from Mr. Bush on the campaign trail. Bush had the lowest approval rating (30%) of any president at their time of leaving office since the end of World War II, except Nixon. [22]  At the same time, Democratic candidate  Barack Obama  tried to portray a McCain presidency as four more years of George W. Bush. The President spoke by videolink at the 2008  Republican National Convention , while his wife Laura appeared on stage with McCain's wife  Cindy .

John McCain lost the election to Senator Obama, and President Bush met with the new president-elect to discuss the presidential transition between his administration and Obama's, which he promised would be efficient and without problems. George W. Bush's term ended at noon on January 20, 2009, at which point President-elect Obama was inaugurated. In an interview with ABC's  Charles Gibson  in December 2008, Bush said his retirement plans included moving back to his home state of Texas and writing a book.  He later released his memoir "Decision Points."  He also wants to build an institute at the Southern Methodist University to serve as a non-partisan public policy forum, to debate issues and run volunteer projects from.

Decision Points  is a memoir written by Bush and was released on November 9, 2010. Bush also went on a national tour after releasing his book. After two months, the book sold very well, surpassing two million copies sold.

The book is 481 pages long and is broken into 14 chapters, with the first two being about Bush before his presidency, covering events such as when he quit drinking alcohol and was governor of  Texas . The remaining twelve are about events during his presidency, such as the War on Terror, the September 11, 2001 attacks, and Hurricane Katrina.

Bush supported his brother,  Jeb  for the Republican nomination in  2016 . Businessman  Donald Trump  strongly criticized both Bushes in the primaries, primarily Jeb. Trump won the Republican nomination, but Bush did not vote for Trump or  Hillary Clinton . [23]

George W. Bush is the son of  George H. W. Bush , who served as vice-president from 1981 to 1989 and as president from 1989 to 1993, and  Barbara Bush . President Bush is married to  Laura Welch Bush , a former teacher and librarian, and they have twin daughters, Barbara and Jenna. John Ellis "Jeb" Bush, Neil Bush and Marvin Bush are his brothers. Dorothy Bush Koch is his only surviving sister, as Pauline Robinson Bush died at age four of  leukemia .

George W. Bush is a member of the  United Methodist Church , and most people feel that George W. Bush's faith is sincere and profound.  The Faith of George W. Bush , a non-political book by author Stephen Strang, made the  New York Times  best-sellers list. [24]  
When asked where he would be without the influence of family friend  Billy Graham , George W. Bush said "I wouldn't be president." "It was just a conversation," said the younger Bush about a talk with Graham in the mid-'80s that changed his life. During the pivotal conversation Bush recalled saying, "'You know, Billy, I'm longing for something.' And I know that he sent me a Bible I still have. All I can tell you is that as a result of being inspired by Billy Graham, I started reading the Bible and shortly after, I quit drinking."  [25]  Bush's faith led him to veto a bill which would have provided for  federal funding  of immoral embryonic stem cell research.

In an interview with ABC's "Nightline" on 12/8/08, the president also said he probably is not a literalist when reading the Bible although an individual can learn a great deal from it, including the New Testament teaching that  God  sent his only son.

During his presidential career, George W Bush often consulted God when making important decisions. For example, Nabil Shaath, who was Palestinian foreign minister at the time, reported that President Bush said that God told him 'George go and fight these terrorists in Afghanistan' and 'George, go and end the tyranny in Iraq'. [26] 
Asked about creation and evolution, Bush said: "I think you can have both. I think evolution can -- you're getting me way out of my lane here. I'm just a simple president. But it's, I think that God created the earth, created the world; I think the creation of the world is so mysterious it requires something as large as an almighty and I don't think it's incompatible with the scientific proof that there is evolution." [27] [28] [29]   
He added:

While President, Bush worshiped regularly at the Evergreen Chapel at Camp David.

When Bush entered office, his popularity rating was near 50%.  However, after the  September 11  attacks, his popularity rose significantly, reaching an all-time high of 90%. [30]   Since, then, though, it declined as some of his policies have become unpopular (largely due to the media's persistently negative—and  biased —reporting on the  Iraq War  and misrepresentation of his policies). [31]   In 2007, Bush had an approval rating of only 24%. [32]  The same poll gave the Democratic controlled Congress an approval rating of only 11%. [32]

Fellow citizens:  For eight years, it has been my honor to serve as your President.  The first decade of this new century has been a period of consequence – a time set apart.  Tonight, with a thankful heart, I have asked for a final opportunity to share some thoughts on the journey we have traveled together and the future of our Nation.

Tonight I am filled with gratitude – to Vice President Cheney and members of the Administration; to Laura, who brought joy to this house and love to my life; to our wonderful daughters, Barbara and Jenna; to my parents, whose examples have provided strength for a lifetime.  And above all, I thank the American people for the trust you have given me.  I thank you for ....

...the prayers that have lifted my spirits.  And I thank you for the countless acts of courage, generosity, and grace that I have witnessed these past eight years.

This evening, my thoughts return to the first night I addressed you from this house – September 11, 2001.  That morning, terrorists took nearly 3,000 lives in the worst attack on America since Pearl Harbor.  I remember standing in the rubble of the World Trade Center three days later, surrounded by rescuers who had been working around the clock.

I remember talking to brave souls who charged through smoke-filled corridors at the Pentagon and to husbands and wives whose loved ones became heroes aboard Flight 93.  I remember Arlene Howard, who gave me her fallen son’s police shield as a reminder of all that was lost.  And I still carry his badge.

As the years passed, most Americans were able to return to life much as it had been before Nine-Eleven.  But I never did.  Every morning, I received a briefing on the threats to our Nation.  And I vowed to do everything in my power to keep us safe.

Over the past seven years, a new Department of Homeland Security has been created.  The military, the  intelligence community , and the FBI have been transformed.  Our Nation is equipped with new tools to monitor the terrorists’ movements, freeze their finances, and break up their plots.  And with strong allies at our side, we have taken the fight to the terrorists and those who support them.

Afghanistan has gone from a nation where the Taliban harbored al Qaeda and stoned women in the streets to a young democracy that is fighting terror and encouraging girls to go to school.  Iraq has gone from a brutal dictatorship and a sworn enemy of America to an Arab democracy at the heart of the Middle East and a friend of the United States.

There is legitimate debate about many of these decisions.  But there can be little debate about the results.  America has gone more than seven years without another terrorist attack on our soil.  This is a tribute to those who toil day and night to keep us safe – law enforcement officers, intelligence analysts, homeland security and diplomatic personnel, and the men and women of the United States Armed Forces.

Our Nation is blessed to have citizens who volunteer to defend us in this time of danger.  I have cherished meeting these selfless patriots and their families.  America owes you a debt of gratitude.  And to all our men and women in uniform listening tonight:  There has been no higher honor than serving as your Commander in Chief.

The battles waged by our troops are part of a broader struggle between two dramatically different systems.  Under one, a small band of fanatics demands total obedience to an oppressive ideology, condemns women to subservience, and marks unbelievers for murder.  The other system is based on the conviction that freedom is the universal gift of Almighty God and that liberty and justice light the path to peace.

This is the belief that gave birth to our Nation.  And in the long run, advancing this belief is the only practical way to protect our citizens.  When people live in freedom, they do not willingly choose leaders who pursue campaigns of terror.  When people have hope in the future, they will not cede their lives to violence and extremism.

So around the world, America is promoting human liberty, human rights, and human dignity.  We are standing with dissidents and young democracies, providing AIDS medicine to bring dying patients back to life, and sparing mothers and babies from malaria.  And this great republic born alone in liberty is leading the world toward a new age when freedom belongs to all nations.

For eight years, we have also strived to expand opportunity and hope here at home.  Across our country, students are rising to meet higher standards in public schools.  A new Medicare prescription drug benefit is bringing peace of mind to seniors and the disabled.  Every taxpayer pays lower income taxes.

The addicted and suffering are finding new hope through faith-based programs.  Vulnerable human life is better protected.  Funding for our veterans has nearly doubled.  America’s air, water, and lands are measurably cleaner.  And the Federal bench includes wise new members like Justice Sam Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts.

When challenges to our prosperity emerged, we rose to meet them.  Facing the prospect of a financial collapse, we took decisive measures to safeguard our economy.  These are very tough times for hardworking families, but the toll would be far worse if we had not acted.  All Americans are in this together.  And together, with determination and hard work, we will restore our economy to the path of growth.  We will show the world once again the resilience of America’s free enterprise system.

Like all who have held this office before me, I have experienced setbacks.  There are things I would do differently if given the chance.  Yet I have always acted with the best interests of our country in mind.  I have followed my conscience and done what I thought was right.  You may not agree with some tough decisions I have made.  But I hope you can agree that I was willing to make the tough decisions.

The decades ahead will bring more hard choices for our country, and there are some guiding principles that should shape our course.

While our Nation is safer than it was seven years ago, the gravest threat to our people remains another terrorist attack.  Our enemies are patient and determined to strike again.  America did nothing to seek or deserve this conflict.  But we have been given solemn responsibilities, and we must meet them.  We must resist complacency.  We must keep our resolve.  And we must never let down our guard.

At the same time, we must continue to engage the world with confidence and clear purpose.  In the face of threats from abroad, it can be tempting to seek comfort by turning inward.  But we must reject isolationism and its companion, protectionism.  Retreating behind our borders would only invite danger.  In the 21st century, security and prosperity at home depend on the expansion of liberty abroad.  If America does not lead the cause of freedom, that cause will not be led.

As we address these challenges – and others we cannot foresee tonight – America must maintain our moral clarity.  I have often spoken to you about good and evil.  This has made some uncomfortable.  But good and evil are present in this world, and between the two there can be no compromise.  Murdering the innocent to advance an ideology is wrong every time, everywhere.

Freeing people from oppression and despair is eternally right.  This Nation must continue to speak out for justice and truth.  We must always be willing to act in their defense and to advance the cause of peace.

President Thomas Jefferson once wrote, “I like the dreams of the future better than the history of the past.”  As I leave the house he occupied two centuries ago, I share that optimism.  America is a young country, full of vitality, constantly growing and renewing itself.  And even in the toughest times, we lift our eyes to the broad horizon ahead.

I have confidence in the promise of America because I know the character of our people.  This is a Nation that inspires immigrants to risk everything for the dream of freedom.  This is a Nation where citizens show calm in times of danger and compassion in the face of suffering.   We see examples of America’s character all around us.  And Laura and I have invited some of them to join us in the White House this evening.

We see America’s character in Dr. Tony Recasner, a principal who opened a new charter school from the ruins of Hurricane Katrina.  We see it in Julio Medina, a former inmate who leads a faith-based program to help prisoners returning to society.  We see it in Staff Sergeant Aubrey McDade, who charged into an ambush in Iraq and rescued three of his fellow Marines.

We see America’s character in Bill Krissoff, a surgeon from California. His son Nathan, a Marine, gave his life in Iraq.  When I met Dr. Krissoff and his family, he delivered some surprising news:  He told me he wanted to join the Navy Medical Corps in honor of his son.  This good man was 60 years old – 18 years above the age limit.

But his petition for a waiver was granted, and for the past year he has trained in battlefield medicine.  Lieutenant Commander Krissoff could not be here tonight, because he will soon deploy to Iraq, where he will help save America’s wounded warriors and uphold the legacy of his fallen son.

In citizens like these, we see the best of our country – resilient and hopeful, caring and strong.  These virtues give me an unshakable faith in America.  We have faced danger and trial, and there is more ahead.  But with the courage of our people and confidence in our ideals, this great Nation will never tire … never falter … and never fail.

It has been the privilege of a lifetime to serve as your President.  There have been good days and tough days.  But every day I have been inspired by the greatness of our country and uplifted by the goodness of our people.  I have been blessed to represent this Nation we love.  And I will always be honored to carry a title that means more to me than any other: citizen of the United States of America.

And so, my fellow Americans, for the final time:  Good night.  May God bless this house and our next President.  And may God bless you and our wonderful country."