Gleichschaltung  (meaning  "coordination" ,  "making the same" ,  "bringing into line" ) [3]  was the  Nazi  policy enforcing  political conformity  in all sectors of society, from the economy and trade associations to the media, culture and education. [4]  It is an example from the early days of the Nazi  dictatorship  of developing its own twisted and distorted language [note 2]  used to  manipulate  and confuse citizens of a  totalitarian  state so that they no longer can distinguish  truth  from  falsehood . Consequently, they are reduced to such a state of confusion [note 3]  and impotence that the dictatorial government can control their hearts and minds.  George Orwell ’s famous books  1984  and  Animal Farm  are the classic fictional and symbolic statements addressing this aspect of totalitarianism. [note 4]  The Ministry of Propaganda established by  Joseph Goebbels , best known for his media and social  manipulation  in  Nazi   Germany , [5]  is used as model for the Ministry of Truth in the  1984 book . [6]  Orwell reasoned that if a government could control all media and interpersonal communication while simultaneously forcing citizens to speak in politically controlled jargon, it could blunt independent thinking. [7]  One of the key figures in the process of Gleichschaltung that established the Nazi dictatorship was  Hermann Göring , who in 1933 banned all Roman Catholic newspapers in  Germany . [8]  When gleichschaltung is applied into the realms of  science , it transforms science into  scientism . The twisted scientific methods and self-serving research are then used to support particular political agenda of the party or  pressure group  having special interests.

Joseph Goebbels, also called the virtuoso of  lying propaganda  took control of, not only the press, but also radio, film, theatre, music, literature, and publishing, purging Jews and all opposition to Nazism from them. He was also behind  The Eternal Jew  and  Jude Süss , now regarded for being the most notorious anti-Semitic films in history of film industry. [5]

A high moral standard cannot be reached or maintained unless it is generally accepted and understood by an overwhelming number of people. [9]  The nineteenth century French  economist , statesman, and author  Frédéric Bastiat  warned that  "When misguided  public opinion  honors what is despicable and despises what is honorable, punishes virtue and rewards vice, encourages what is harmful and discourages what is useful, applauds falsehood and smothers truth under indifference or insult, a nation turns its back on progress and can be restored only by the terrible lessons of catastrophe." [10]  According to Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, such catastrophe took place in  France  in the first half of the 20th century after the invasion of the country by  Nazi   German  army. Before, people had not realized the severity of the "sickness" of society, let alone that they were "sick" themselves. After the disaster of losing the national  sovereignty , they have learnt that they were "sick" thus the corresponding treatment could be initiated. The way for the future has been paved owing to comprehending their own egoism and vanity. [11]

In the course of few decades the radical homosexual activists have managed to adopt the terminology of human rights [13]  in order to make the way for their particular interests hence depriving the human rights of their true content. [14]   LGBT I campaigners have been using the language of rights [15]  in an attempt to add moral force to what are nothing more than personal desires. [note 6]  In many cases they have bypassed the democratic process and succeeded in imposing their views on the rest of the population by force of law given not by parliaments but created from judicial bench by means of  judicial activism . [16]  In  Roman law  this type of judicial activity made for the purpose of fullfiling the sensual lust and sexual bodily urges was titled  Libidinis causa . The legal causes outwardly pretending the just cause but in fact hiding the real intentions and will of their originators were termed in  Latin  as  Dissimulatio  and Servius (Ulp. D.4,3,1,2) labeled them as  deception  ( dolorum malum ). [17]   Francis Bacon  regarded as negative phenomenon the  dissimulation  when a man lets fall signs and arguments, that he is not, that he is [here:  Human being  belonging to  humankind  that consists of two complementary  sexes  —  male  and  female [note 7] ]; and called as  simulation  the situation when a man industriously and expressly feigns and pretends to be [here: LGBT+ [note 8] ], that he is not. [18]

In his short  satiric  video sketch titled  Modern Educayshun , Neel Kolhatkar shows how policies of LGBTI Gleichschltung disguised under the label of  Gender equality  delve into the potential dangers of modern increasingly reactionary culture bred by social media and  political correctness . [19]

LGBTI lobbyists make efforts to equate sodomy, a pattern of perverse behavior between people of same sex involving anal or oral sex, with a civil right. [20] [21] [22]  This  manipulative  effort often involves trickery that can be called  LGBTI Bundling , tactic of wrapping practitioners of perverse sexual behavior in the cloak of civil rights by sponsoring coalitions of minorities and including themselves as a member minority. In  Bowers v. Hardwick , the  US Supreme Court  ruled, that claiming, as LGBTI advocates do, [23]  a right to engage in sodomitical  conduct  and argue that it is  "deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition"  or  "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty" , is, at best, facetious. The  U.S. Constitution  does not confer a fundamental right upon  homosexuals  to engage in sodomy.

See Also:   Sexual orientation theory

The term  Sexual orientation  is used by “gay” activists to deceive both policy makers and the public about the nature of  homosexuality , which should be more accurately termed a  sexual disorientation . [note 9]  The LGBTI, or gender nonsensical theory about  sexuality  was invented by “gay” political strategists to serve their own selfish interests at the expense of the welfare of society as a whole. It helps to frame the debate about homosexuality in such a way that the average person is tricked into accepting “gay” presuppositions without challenge and even those people who continue to oppose the homosexuals’ political goals start using their twisted language. Once the presuppositions have been accepted, especially when they become “law” in so called "anti-discrimination" policies, resistance to rest of  the “gay” agenda  becomes much more difficult.
The only effective counter-strategy is to reject and refute the false assumptions of sexual orientation and re-frame the issues on a truthful foundation. [30]

Homophobia  is an obscure psychiatric term originally coined to define “a person’s fear of his or her own  same-sex attraction .” It has been redefined and misused by the political strategists of the “gay” movement such as  George Weinberg  in order to ostracize all disapproval of homosexuality as a form of hatred and fear akin to  mental illness  (a  phobia  is an anxiety disorder). The word “homophobia” is today not a scientific term, but a propaganda tool for  psychological manipulation . As a rhetorical weapon, it serves:

When any expression of opposition to homosexuality alias sodomy draws the accusation that one is a mentally-ill bigot equivalent to a racist, few people will venture to express their opposition to sodomical lifestyle publicly. Those who still will do, will also tend to be defensive, offering the disclaimer that they are not hateful, thus unintentionally but implicitly validating the lie that hatefulness and not valid objections is the general rule. The solution countering this LGBTI gleichschaltung is to reject the term “homophobia” itself as harmful and illegitimate. Its illegitimacy can be exposed by making the "gay" sophists define the term with emphasis on the distinction between "homophobia" and non-homophobic opposition to sodomical lifestyle based on presenting valid arguments, such as, for example, scientific  thought experiments . They will reveal that they accept no opposition to their agenda as legitimate. [note 10]

Heterosexism is another artificial word invetned by LGBTI political startegists and sex reformers. It has been designed to derogate the  scientific conclusion  that natural family framed in traditional  marriage  of one man and one woman should be accepted as the best norm for society in order to ensure its integrity, and that this norm should be upheld and valued in social institutions, including public schools. Totalitarian supporters of gender ideology striving in their activism for acceptance of deviant sexual behaviours insist that words such as "wife," "husband," "father" and "mother" used in association with family life are "discriminatory" and should not be taught to children. [30]  They are trying to enforce into schools their  politically correct  educational programs, such as one called  “Proud Schools”  in Australia, thus advancing their political agenda under the fig leaf of promoting tolerance and an anti-bullying message. [32]