1.The North supported higher tariffs because they protected their manufacturing companies against competition by foreign manufacturers. Tariffs were a tax on any imported goods to the United States. These taxes helped domestic business because people would have to pay more to buy a product from Europe instead of buying the same item that was made at home in the north. Not only was the North taxing the South’s products, but Europe was also taxing the South as well. Europe was retaliating against the Southerns by adding tariffs to their cotton prices too. The South was upset with the North for taxing on imports because often they wanted the better brand of European equipment available. The South hated the North’s unfair tariffs that tried to control the market and interfere with fair trading practices. Eventually, this became a major cause of the Civil War.

3.The most politically conservative president after George Washington was James Monroe. Monroe was an Anti-Federalist who earlier had opposed the ratification of the Constitution and was against the power of the national government becoming too strong. He accomplished numerous things that continue to shape our country today. Monroe’s accomplishments include the Rush-Bagot Treaty, Adams-Onis Treaty, the Missouri Compromise, and the Monroe Doctrine. The Rush-Bagot treaty set a limit on armaments on the Great Lake waterways and a demilitarization of our border with Canada. The Adams-Onis Treaty added Florida and the land north of the southern border of Oregon to the United States. The Missouri Compromise solved for a time the issue of whether slavery should be permitted in certain states. It also made two states with opposite slavery laws come into the Union together because both the North and the South did not want to lose their balance of power in the Senate. Maine and Missouri were added to the United States simultaneously as a result of this agreement. Perhaps the most important of all of Monroe’s work as President was the Monroe Doctrine. It stated that Europe should not add any new colonies in North or South America. Monroe stated that Europe should not interfere with business in the western Hemisphere. This Doctrine is what our country still refers to today when Europe tries to get involved in North and South America. Under Monroe’s conservative direction, we accomplished many good things for our country including the building of roads and canals. He was so popular, that Monroe was reelected with no opposition. Historians today call Monroe’s administration the “era of good feelings” because during Monroe’s two terms everybody was working on making our country better. Roads and canals were being built, the economy blossomed and most spending bills on internal projects in Congress were rejected. He truly was a great President, maybe even the best we have had!

4.I think that the War of 1812 was a necessary war. When America won, we showed England and the rest of the world that we were a separate nation from Great Britain, we were finished with them ruling us and we would not be taken advantage of or pushed around any longer. England started this war by committing several cruel acts against America. They harassed the U.S. sailors transporting goods to Europe and impressed them, forcing them to work in Great Britain’s navy. England also armed and incited attacks by the Indians on forts and settlements in the U.S. English troops came to America and burned Washington D.C. to the ground. After these nuisances and affronts to America, the U.S. decided to go to war with them and keep them out of our land once and for all! The battles that Andrew Jackson and William Harrison won were very important because it showed that a rag-tag team of backwoodsmen, once again, could defend and defeat the greatest military power of that time. We were able to take down the British Empire twice; during the Revolutionary War and the War of 1812. Another thing to consider as well, the two generals, Andrew Jackson and William Harrison, gained a lot of popularity among the states for their leadership and accomplishments and both men eventually became presidents. Without their victories during the War of 1812, they may never have become as admired and won their presidential campaigns. The war of 1812 was necessary to establish our place and respect in the world.

6.One decision that I like most from the Marshall Court was the Marbury v. Madison case of 1803. This decision made by the Supreme Court said that the judiciary has the power to declare an Act of Congress unconstitutional. This is important because of the state nullification right discussed in the previous lecture. If five-ninths of the Supreme Court rules an Act of Congress unconstitutional, it does not matter if the other two branches of the government are in favor of a new law, the Supreme Court can override the law. This is probably the most important and my favorite decision rendered by the Marshall Court; giving the Supreme Court power to overturn legislation that it does not meet constitutional criteria.

My least favorite decision made by the Marshall Court was that of the Cherokee Nation v. Georgia in 1831. This did not even allow the Cherokees a voice in the case. It also stated that the Cherokees are not a nation and thus took away their legal American right and to sue in federal court. It gave Georgia the right to remove them from their state. These Native Americans were ironically not even recognized as citizens. They were seen as a nuisance or problem that needed to be dealt with expeditiously in favor of the white man’s desires for expansion. This is my least favorite Marshall Court case because they did not allow the Cherokees any choice in the situation and it seems to be a low moral point in our nation’s history.

7.The figures in the cartoon represent three countries; Russia is the bear, America is the lady, Columbia, and Great Britain is John Bull. This cartoon depicts negotiation for peace between America and Great Britain during 1813. Russia is trying to mediate a treaty for peace between the two nations. John Bull, who is in a posture of entreaty, is saying that they should never have tried to fight with America again. He describes us as wasps and hornets; fighting back when our nests, or homeland (including Washington D.C.), are threatened or harmed. Lady Columbia is saying that the U.S. cannot trust Britain because even though John Bull previously promised to “draw his horns” he did not respect our rights as a nation. Columbia will not be fooled again by him. Only when she sees that he is tied down and his intentions guaranteed will she talk about a peace treaty. This cartoonist’s viewpoint on the war of 1812 is from the American perspective. He strongly agrees that Britain has harmed our nation once again and we should not be too quick to trust England’s word and be tricked into a peace treaty until there is proof that Britain has stopped harassing America.

8.I noticed a couple different things about the map from the lecture. Both Great Britain and the United States shared the ownership of the northern part of Maine and the Oregon Country. After the War of 1812, Britain was told to stay out of our country and not attack us any more when they signed the Treaty of Ghent. Britain was allowed to colonize Canada further, but there would be an open Canadian-U.S. border. I would have thought that America would have forced them out of the land, but they had still not resolved the ownership and both countries still disputed those territories. Another interesting thing that I noticed was that the Republic of Texas was much smaller than it is today. The area that was west of that was either still disputed or was still considered Mexico’s territory. They were not going to give it to Texas or America. Texas won it’s independence in 1836 and was considered a country. It didn’t become a state until 1845.

Honors Questions:

1.I do believe that the Louisiana Purchase was unconstitutional, but I think we did not over pay for the land. Jefferson bought the land during this rare opportunity for two specific reasons; an offer like this comes along once in a lifetime, and if Jefferson had waited for Congress to approve of this, the delay may have cost us the opportunity. France might have sold it to someone else or changed her mind. France was selling ALL of their territory in the new world because they thought that trying to colonize there would be a bad and costly idea. France sold it to America for $11.25 million dollars, about a penny per acre! The final price of the purchase was actually 15 million dollars because James Monroe, who negotiated the price with France, agreed that the United States would assume nearly 4 million dollars in debts owed by France to American citizens at the time. The Louisiana Purchase would double the size of America eventually, and greatly increase our prosperity and power in the world. If Jefferson had not acted so boldly the price may have gone up or the opportunity might have been lost. Ultimately, Congress overwhelmingly approved the purchase after the fact. I believe that Jefferson was not misusing his power, but showing leadership and using his positions power for the good of our nation’s future. We must be careful because this argument could be made for other abuses of power in the future. Back then, with slow communication and travel available, if Jefferson had waited for Congress to meet and discuss the approval of the purchase, valuable time would have been lost. Today, with so many advances in travel, communication and technology, Congressmen can easily act in a swifter manner. If a president did this today, I would be upset because he could easily call an urgent meeting of Congress to discuss the issue in a timely fashion.

2.My favorite political party during this time period was the Democratic-Republican Party. The party came into being to run against incumbent president, John Adams, who was a strict Federalist. This party was really the only party during this time period that had any power in Washington D.C. It wasn’t until after Jackson was elected that another party gained any strength of opposition. Some of the other Presidents during this period include Thomas Jefferson, James Monroe, James Madison and John Quince Adams. Jefferson and Monroe accomplished many significant laws and several states were acquired into the Union. This party, founded by Thomas Jefferson himself, believed that a weak national government and keeping the power it at a local level was better for the new country. The Democratic-Republicans also believed that friendly dealings with France and a strict interpretation of the Constitution was a smarter choice for America. I believe that keeping the government small was the intelligent option for America because the states still wanted freedom from the government to make their own laws that would benefit their state. Keeping friendly relations with France was good because they eventually sold us the Louisiana Territory. If we did not respect France as much, France might have sold the land to Mexico or another country. Interpreting the constitution in a strict manner is key since so many new ideas and laws are being passed through Congress. If we don’t take the time to determine if a law holds up under the Constitutional scrutiny, then the Constitution does not matter to our country at all. If I had lived during the time of the early 1800’s, I would definitely have been a Democratic-Republican citizen.

4.Jackson is considered to be the first modern president because he established many powerful tools for modern presidents. These establishments include vetoing bills of Congress to prevent them from becoming law, removing people from office when the president disagreed with them, and using executive orders as president to give his views the power of law. Jackson vetoed more laws than any other president before him combined! He stopped many laws that he disagreed with from going into effect. Jackson would throw out anybody if they didn’t agree with him on any issue at all. Jackson dropped his vice president from the ballot during his reelection because he didn’t’ agree with one of Jackson’s views. I guess if you worked for the Jackson administration in the executive branch, you were either totally with him or against him! Jackson used his executive power to give his views the power of law. He made sure that this country didn’t fall apart and kept it together through his presidential power. Just as Abe Lincoln kept the nation from dividing during the Civil War forty years later, Andrew Jackson kept the southern states united with everyone. Historians today say that Andrew Jackson was the first modern president because he wasn’t a member of government’s symphony; Jackson was the conductor of the symphony. As a conductor would do, Jackson led the “instruments” or branches of government rather than them telling him what to do. Jackson made changes to the score based on how the instruments were playing, not based on what the band wanted him to do. Jackson was the first modern president and a great president during this time. That is probably why he is on our nation’s twenty dollar bill!

Danny T.