Below are some resources on  homosexuality  and pedophilia/pederasty:

See also:   Teenage homosexuality

Steve Baldwin published the following in the  Regent University  Law Review regarding homosexuality and pedophilia:

The most comprehensive gay networking website, the Queer Resource Directory ....links every gay group in the country including NAMBLA and other  homosexual  groups that focus on youth. NAMBLA marches in gay pride parades with the consent of the gay leadership. Many of the homosexual movement’s most prominent leaders endorse NAMBLA and its goals. Gay authors and leaders such as  Allen Ginsberg , Gayle Rubin,  Larry Kramer  (founder of ACT-UP), Pat Califia, Jane Rule, Michael Kearns, and Michel Foucault have all written in favor of either NAMBLA or man-boy relationships.   Harry Hay , whom many consider the founder of the American homosexual movement, invited NAMBLA members to march with him in the 1993 "March on Washington" gay rights parade. He also marched in the 1986 Los Angeles gay parade wearing a shirt emblazoned with the words "NAMBLA walks with me."

Leading mainstream homosexual newspapers and magazines such as the Advocate, Edge, Metroline, The Guide, and The San Francisco
Sentinel have not only published pro-NAMBLA articles and columns but also many have editorialized in favor of NAMBLA and sex with children. [1]

There are notable instances of prominent homosexual organizations being permissive towards pedophilia or condoning/promoting pedophilia. For example, the  Journal of Homosexuality   is an academic journal which has featured material that looks upon pedophilia in a generally approvingly manner. [2] [3]  For example, an article by Dr. Brongersma stated that parents should not view a pedophile "as a rival or competitor, not as a thief of their property, but as a partner in the boy's upbringing, someone to be welcomed into their home..." [4]

The International Lesbian and Gay Association was founded in 1978 and is a worldwide network of national and local homosexual groups has more than 620 member organizations. [5]   In 1993 the ILGA obtained consultative status on the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) but in 1994 they lost their status due to groups within their membership, most notably the  North American Man/Boy Love Association  (NAMBLA) and Vereniging MARTIJN, advocating pedophilia or expressing solidarity with pro-pedophilia groups. [6]  ILGA expelled the groups associated with pedophilia but they were denied 
ECOSOC decided against restoring ILGA’s consultative status in 2002 and once again in January 2006. [7]   NAMBLA had been a member of the ILGA for a decade before it was expelled by the ILGA.  NAMBLA calls itself a homosexual organization.

Peter LaBarbera  of  Americans for Truth  wrote:

....Let’s see: three homosexual Congressmen involved in sexual seductions of minor boys-ages 16, 17, and 17 ( Foley ). And yet homosexual activists ridicule anyone who suggests there is a predatory or pedophilic component to male homosexuality…” [8]

see also:   Atheism, pederasty and NAMBLA  and  atheism

Some of the well known  atheist  advocates of the  North American Man-Boy Love Association  (NAMBLA) are:

1. The atheist and  homosexual   David Thorstad  was a founding member of the North American Man-Boy Love Association (NAMBLA). [9]

2.  Harry Hay  (1912 - 2002) was an  liberal  advocate of  statutory rape  and the widely acknowledged founder and progenitor of the  activist  homosexual agenda  in the  United States . Hay joined the  Communist Party of the United States  (CPUSA) in 1934. [10]   Harry Hay was an atheist. [11]  He was a vociferous advocate of man/boy love. [12] [13]  In 1986, as noted earlier, Hay marched in a  gay  parade wearing a shirt emblazoned with the words " NAMBLA  walks with me." [14]

3. The writer  Samuel R. Delaney  is an atheist and a  homosexual . [15] [16]  Delaney said he was a supporter of NAMBLA. [17]

See also:   John Maynard Keynes and pederasty

John Maynard Keynes  was the founder of  Keynesian economics . Lytton Strachey, his male bed partner, wrote that Keynes was “A  liberal  and a  sodomite , An atheist and a statistician.” [18]  Keynes and his friends made numerous trips to the resorts surrounding the Mediterranean.  At the resorts, little boys were sold by their families to bordellos which catered to homosexuals. [19]

In 2008,  The Atlantic  reported:

The first diary is easy: Keynes lists his sexual partners, either by their initials (GLS for Lytton Strachey, DG for Duncan Grant) or their nicknames ("Tressider," for J. T. Sheppard, the King's College Provost). When he apparently had a quick, anonymous hook-up, he listed that sex partner generically: "16-year-old under Etna" and "Lift boy of Vauxhall" in 1911, for instance, and "Jew boy," in 1912. [20]

Keynes was a  bisexual  who married Lydia Lopokova, a famous Russian ballerina; they were married for 21 years. [21]   In his work  The Cambridge Apostles, 1820-1914: Liberalism, Imagination, and Friendship in British Intellectual and Professional Life , William C. Lubenow expresses the opinion that Keynes was an  agnostic . [22]

Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the American  Roman Catholic  bishops and the Vatican had noted a growing problem with clerical sexual abuse in the U.S. [23]  In addition, Ireland and other European countries have experienced problems relating to instances of Roman Catholic priests sexually abusing children. [24]

Catholic League president Bill Donohue declared concerning the scandals of priests molesting minors:

The data collected by John Jay College of Criminal Justice show that between 1950 and 2002, 81 percent of the victims were male and 75 percent of them were post-pubescent. In other words, three out of every four victims have been abused by homosexuals. By the way, puberty, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics, begins at age 10 for boys.

No problem can be remedied without an accurate diagnosis. And any accurate diagnosis that does not finger the role that homosexuals have played in molesting minors is intellectually dishonest. The cover-up must end. And so must attempts to muzzle my voice. Everything I am saying is what most people already know, but are afraid to say it. It's time for some straight talk. [25]

Bill Donahue published in the  New York Times :

For related information please see :  Teenager Homosexuality

In 2006, the noted pediatric journal  entitled  Journal of Adolescent Health  published a position paper entitled  HIV  infection and  AIDS  in adolescents: An update of the position of the Society for Adolescent Medicine . [27]  The aforementioned 2006 position paper of the Journal of Adolescent Health stated the following: "Among adolescents and young adults with HIV or AIDS, most infections are acquired by having sex with HIV-infected men." [28]  In addition, the  Journal of Adolecent Health  stated the following:

For more information please see:   Adolescent AIDS and Medical Community Negligence

In 2000, the medical journal  AIDS (London, England)  made the following embarrassing admission in respect to a 1998 review of the medical literature by medical researchers Mansergh and Marks:

In 1995, without giving specific age ranges of homosexual adolescents' sexual partners, medical researchers stated the following regarding youths seeking help at the only homosexual identified agency New York City: "...many homosexual male adolescents have sexual relationships with homosexual men, the group with the highest prevalence for AIDS." [31]

Given that the adolescent HIV infection was seen as a problem in the late 1980s, the failure of medical researchers to publish material in the past regarding the age ranges of the individuals infecting adolescents is inexcusable.  The pro-homosexaulity publication  The Advocate  stated the following regarding adolescent HIV infection on March 24, 1992 in an article entitled  America's Worst Kept Secret - AIDS is devastating the Nation's Teenager and Gay Kids are Dying by the Thousands :

"Teenagers are the next wave of the epidemic," warns Dr. Karen Hein, associate professor of pediatrics, epidemiology, and social medicine at the  Albert Einstein  College of Medicine in  New York City ....

The CDC stated in November that in  Los Angeles  and  Miami , adolescent AIDS cases represent about 20% of all reported cases in those cities and that in  Newark , N.J  adolescents represent almost 35% of all AIDS cases. The infection rates among adolescents are similarly high in  San Francisco ,  Boston , and  Philadelphia . [32]

In 1987, in an article entitled  Male Homosexuality: An Adolescents Perspective  the medical journal  Pediatrics  made the following admission regarding the poverty of medical study regarding adolescents and homosexuality:

The pro-homosexuality publication  The Advocate  in 1992 made the following admission in regards to homosexuality and HIV infection in American youth:

In 1991, the medical researcher Kruks reported the following in the  Journal of Adolescent Health  regarding homosexuality and HIV infection among youth:

These relationships are often extremely damaging for a number of reasons. The "sugar daddy" usually presents himself to the youth in a loving caretaker role. For a street youth who has a past history of rejection and/or abuse, the promise of being loved and cared for is a compelling one. However, these relationships in many ways have similar dynamics to incest.

Many gay youths coming to YSD [Youth Services Dept. of Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Community Service Center] for services have long histories of being involved in a succession of "sugar daddy" relationships. Each of these is a cycle of falling in love, believing that life will now be wonderful forever and that this older adult truly loves the young person, discovering that in fact it is just sex that the adult wants, feeling the impact of one more betrayal, and ending up on the streets again. The whole cycle last an average of 1-2 months, and the youth often becomes extremely  suicidal  at the end of each cycle. [35] [36]

In 1995, the medical journal  Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine  stated the following:

Peter LaBarbera  who is president of American's for Truth, which is an organization that opposes the  homosexual agenda , stated the following:

Concerned Women for America  wrote:

In the column, Norman quotes Tracy Thorne, a homosexual and activist for homosexuals in the military, saying that Foley brought a “boyfriend” along on a visit to Thorne in the early 1990s.

Foley and his spokesman say they will not answer reporters’ questions about his “personal life.” The homosexual newspaper Washington Blade was told the same when it asked spokesman Kirk Fordham “point blank if Foley is gay.” [39]