Income redistribution  can be either the act of an individual's voluntary  charitable  giving or government mandated  compulsory transfer of  assets  and  income  from one group of citizens to another group.

Most  conservatives  accept and advocate voluntary charitable giving as necessary to alleviate social problems, but believe the government should not interfere, but rather should encourage personal involvement and personal giving to the underprivileged, elderly, disabled, and other hardship cases. Also, many conservatives view some forms of government redistribution as an impingement on personal rights, leading to unjust expropriation of property, fostering irresponsible social conduct and acting as a disincentive for personal involvement to alleviate social problems. Also, mandatory giving may create jobs for bureaucrats and dependent constituencies as electoral bases.  By contrast better off liberals like professors are more likely to vote for political parties that favor income redistribution. Income redistribution will increase the taxation they personally pay.  They show altruism by the way they vote.

Liberals  generally support income redistribution based on their belief that individual charitable giving cannot be relied upon and tends to advocate some degree of compulsory redistribution of resources as necessary. Charitable institutions are sometimes bureaucratic and inefficient.

Examples of government programs performing compulsory income redistribution include  welfare  and  progressive taxation . Socialists believe that increased redistribution and consequent reductions in inequality lead to better outcomes for individual welfare and freedom. Likewise, Professor Richard Layard has argued that "in societies where income differences between rich and poor are smaller, the statistics show not only that community life is stronger and people are much more likely to trust each other; but also there is less violence – including substantially lower homicide rates – health is better and life expectancy several years longer, prison populations are smaller; birth rates among teenagers are lower, levels of educational attainment among school children tend to be higher; and there is more social mobility. In all cases, where income differences are narrower, outcomes are better."

Progressives try to sell ideas of egalitarianism as new, however historically the concept of wealth redistribution is very old, having its roots in the  Palace economies  of early city-states.   Benjamin Franklin  at the  Constitutional Convention  mentioned how the Pharaohs engaged in it. [1]

Benjamin Franklin was not the only one who noticed.  Another Founding Father,  James Madison  made multiple observations regarding the theft of income or assets, "levelling", from one person to another.  On June 26, 1787, he said:

Again, on August 7, he observed:

Outside of the Convention, other Founding Fathers such as  Samuel Adams  have written:

Samuel Adams  has long been established as the author of this.

Likewise,  William Bradford  wrote in his book (p. 135)  History of the Plymouth Plantation :

After a few years of strife, deaths, and other calamity, Bradford wrote (p. 136) that he was thankful to God for showing the colonists the error of 'comunitie' of 'propertie' and 'comone wealth', saying "God in his wisdome saw another course fiter for them." [5]

Generally speaking, early Americans and the Founders in particular considered wealth redistribution to be an injustice, a danger, and a form of slavery, and they said so.  Either saying so directly, or indirectly with comparisons to well known historical tyrants.

Wealth redistribution was called "levelling" back then.

Wealth redistribution has the net-effect of consolidating power for rulers by, in effect, rewarding certain groups for their support while punishing others.  In a discussion regarding public debtors,  Oliver Ellsworth  made the following observation:

During the  2016 presidential election , then candidate  Ben Carson  discussed the role of  welfare  and the buying of votes. [8]   He said: "You can’t take care of yourself and I’m going to give you food stamps, a housing subsidy and free health care, and all the things you need so you can stay dependent and vote for me." [9]

Preying on those with limited economic means for support does extend outside of government.  Actor  Sean Penn  conducted an interview with notorious drug lord Joaquín Archivaldo Guzmán Loera, commonly referred to as  El Chapo , in an interview for  Rolling Stone  magazine. [10]   In the article, Penn notes how in the process of establishing the Sinaloa cartel, El Chapo established himself as a mythical, "Robin Hood-like figure who provided much-needed services in the Sinaloa mountains" such as food,road building, and also medical relief.  All of this support that El Chapo received was mainly because he purchased it, using the largess of his drug funding.

Liberals have attempted to redefine the terms "income redistribution" and "redistribution of wealth" to demonize  free market   capitalism  and small government. They claim that  trickle down economics , deregulation, and tax cuts have redistributed income from the poor and middle class to the rich. [11]  As evidence they point to income data, such as data in the report released by the Congressional Budget Office in October 2011. [12]  However, the  lamestream media  and liberal politicians have heavily exaggerated this fact recently.

For a more detailed treatment, see  Robin Hood . 
In the original stories, the people of England suffered under the oppression of a high tax regime created by the King and enforced by the Sheriff. Robin Hood's unsanctioned tax cuts worked against this system.  The new Robin Hood as a hero of redistributive purposes did not appear until the late 1700s, through the work of  Joseph Ritson .  This transformation is quite destructive of everything that Robin Hood fought for, considering that the King was imposing excessive taxes, and redistribution requires the same kind of high tax imposition.

For a more detailed treatment, see  First Book of Samuel (Translated) . 
In 1 Samuel 8, as the Israelites turned away from God and toward the necessity of a Monarch, as other nations at the time were doing, Samuel warned them solemnly about the dangers of a King.  Here is what he said: [13]