Iskhak Abdulovich Akhmerov  (1901 – 1975) was born in Troitsk, located in modern Chelyabinsk Oblast,  was a  Soviet  spy of Tatar background who joined the  Bolshevik  Party in 1919. Akhmerov attended the Communist University of Toilers of the East and the Moscow State University, where he graduated from the School of International Relations in 1930.  Akhmerov joined the  OGPU / NKVD  in 1930 and participated in the suppression of  anti-Soviet  movements in the USSR's Bukhara Republic between 1930 and 1931. Akhmerov spoke Turkish, English and French.  His wife, an American who worked for Soviet intelligence, was  Helen Lowry  ( Elza Akhmerova ), the niece of the  CPUSA  General Secretary  Earl Browder .

In 1932 Akhmerov transferred to the foreign intelligence of the  NKVD  and served as a covert intelligence officer under diplomatic cover in Turkey. He became a covert field officer serving in China in 1934.  In 1935 he entered the  United States  with false identity papers and served until 1939.  Akhmerov returned in 1942 and served as  covert  resident  in the United States during  World War II  and operated under cover as a clothier. Akhnreov is known to have used the cover names  William Grienke ,  Michael Green ,  Michael Adamec , and several others while in the United States. His code names in intercepted  Venona  decrypts of Soviet intelligence messages are  MAYOR  and  ALBERT . [1] [2]

Akhmerov worked closely with  Joseph Katz . He had turned his surveillance operations over to Katz, and Katz had succeeded him as the superior of  Elizabeth Bentley  and her web of agents. On March 3, 1945, the director of the  KGB , Lt. General  Pavel Fitin  instructed Akhmerov to learn what he could about American plans for the forthcoming San Francisco  United Nations  Charter Conference.  Assigning top priority to the task, Fitin ordered an early report.   Alger Hiss  was responsible for planning the conference, and Akhmerov was tasked with carrying a breach of standard security precuations which ordinarily prevented an officer of the KGB from contacting an agent of the GRU.

He was  And he was also  Josef Stalin 's personal representative to  Harry Hopkins , who he considered an agent of "major significance" but "an unconscious rather than a conscious agent."  [3] [4]

In late 1945 or early 1946 Akhmerov returned to the  Soviet Union  and became deputy chief of the KGB's covert intelligence section (отдел нелегальной разведки). He attained the rank of colonel and was awarded the Order of the Red Banner twice, the Order of the Badge of Honor, and the badge of Honored Chekist. [5]