"Islamophobia"  is, literally, "fear of Islam" though the term can be used for a variety of purposes, like:  "fear or hatred of  Islam  and Muslims" , and is often used to smear people opposed to and critical of Islam.

"Islamophobia" is a neologism which defines hatred of  Muslims  and Islam as an "irrational fear". It is generally used to intimidate critics of Islam in America and prosecute critics in Europe. [2] [3] [4]

According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the first known use of the term "Islamophobia" was in 1976, though it has become more frequently used since the 1997 publication of  Islamophobia: A Challenge For Us All  by Trevor Phillips of the Runnymede Trust, a left-wing UK think tank that focuses on race and racism. [5] [6] [7] [8]  However, according to former Imam Abdur-Rahman Muhammad in a Daily News article, the term "Islamophobia" was conceived in Islamic think tanks for the purpose of "beating down critics."  [9]

The Runnymede Trust defines "Islamophobia" as having the following characteristics:

Liberals use the term "Islamophobia" often as a way to demonize and smear their opposition. But true Islamophobia is often espoused by the defenders of Islam. Politically correct attitudes of liberals demand concerns for Islamic sensitivity, a fear of offending Islam, demand concessions for Islam over legitimate religions, obfuscate or whitewash Islamic beliefs as to minimize their true intentions. For example, liberals combat so-called "Islamophobia" by exercising  tolerance  for the  Islamic judicial process  which demands that persons convicted of homosexual acts be thrown from the highest point, usually a tall building. The liberal idea of "Islamophobia" is not an irrational fear of Muslims but rather a fear of offending Muslims.

CAIR  is notorious for using the term, heavily equating "Islamophobia" with " racism " despite Islam being a socio-political ideology and not a "race" or a "religion".

In a May 2001 interview,  British  politician Nick Griffin stated "Muslims are the biggest problem at present, for several reasons, because they have the highest birth rate, which means their communities need living space - that's what the ethnic cleansing is about. They have political corruption in their own countries, and when they have a chance to get council [housing] places they are there for graft. Most important of all is that Islam is an aggressive religion."  [10]

On September 15, 2001, Balbir Singh Sodhi, a  Sikh  man (known for wearing distinctive beards and turbans) was mistaken for a Muslim and murdered at a gas station in Mesa, Arizona. His murderer, Frank Silva Roque, was convicted and initially sentenced to death, but this was commuted to life in prison without the possibility of parole by the Arizona Supreme Court. [11]

Kenan Malik, a British writer, has criticized the concept of "Islamophobia", calling it a myth.  He argues that the charge of "Islamophobia" is leveled against those who criticize  Islam  or Muslims in any way (even when those criticisms are legitimate) to serve as a "chilling effect."

Rowan Atkinson, a British comic-actor has likewise stated that although criticizing another person based on their race is ridiculous and irrational, criticizing another's religion, which is a voluntary belief, is a right.  He further stated that laws should not be created which protect certain types of ideas from criticism and not others.

Stephen Schwartz , an American  writer  and critic of  Wahabbism , has stated that although the charge of "Islamophobia" is sometimes leveled too quickly against an opponent, that it is still a real phenomenon, [12]  which he defines as:

Daniel Pipes  argues that the word "Islamophobia" conflates "fear of Islam and fear of radical Islam" and is used to suppress all criticism of Islam including radical Islam. Even moderate Muslims who critically examine the excesses of fellow Muslims are labeled "Islamophobes". [13]  The term is used to make Muslims another victim-group. [14]  Paul Jackson in his study of anti-Islamic politics in the UK, criticizes the Runnymede criteria as lacking in distinctions. He points out the term prevents justifiable examination of jihadi groups. [15]

David Horowitz and Robert Spencer wrote that accusations of "Islamophobia" are a  PC  thought crime used by liberals against conservatives. [16]