It Gets Better  is a video made by  Dan Savage  and a public relations campaign [1]  based on it.

The theme's basis is the claim that if homosexual youths can "just get through their teen years", they'll be able to enjoy the protection of adult power and camaraderie which will overcome the "daily tormenting and bullying" they face now. [2]  A premise of this is that the main problem the gay community faces is lack of acceptance and toleration from "straight" people.

The campaign began in September 2010, when Savage noted a number of suicides by teenagers with homosexual thoughts who had been bullied for their  sexual orientation . He told teens to hold on to their  homosexuality , promising them that adult homosexual life will provide them "levels of happiness, potential, and positivity".
In response to the suicide of a teenager named Billy Lucas, Savage expressed, "I wish I could have talked to this kid for five minutes. I wish I could have told Billy that  it gets better . I wish I could have told him that, however bad things were, however isolated and alone he was,  it gets better ."(Author's emphasis) [3]  Savage, in conjunction with several organizations founded the project as a  501(c)(3)  organization and set up a  YouTube   channel  to which videos could be uploaded.

While the channel started off with just a video from Savage and another person, within two weeks more than 200 videos were submitted to the project and soon after the project reached YouTube's video limit of 640 submissions. Due to the increasing submissions an website was launched to host more videos. The site continues to accept submissions. [4]

The It Gets Better project is currently a national embarrassment. In 2012, as many as 100 students walked out of an anti-bullying speech by  homosexual activist  Dan Savage when he turned the topic to the  Bible  and engaged in anti- Christian  bullying through shouting vulgarities and mocking Christian beliefs. [5]

The project has seen its fair share of criticism from both sides of the spectrum.

In January 2012,  Vox Day  reported that two gay teenagers who had made videos It Gets Better Project died by suicide.(see also:  Mental Health and Homosexuality ). [6]  Vox Day also indicated that it doesn't get better and that homosexuality is a deviate lifestyle that homosexual propagandists promote (see:  Homosexuality and choice ). [6]

Those on the  right  have argued that while it is noble to help troubled young people, Dan Savage's video message is wrong and that gay teens need help. Mentally and physically, it gets better by leaving homosexuality. At the least, they say,  abstinence  will prolong their lives, not shorten it.

Some of its proponents have suggested that "It Gets Better" should be making things better now, instead of saying it will get better later in the future. [7]

In October 2010 President  Barack Obama [1]  and former  First Lady   Laura Bush [8]  submitted videos to the project.

Inspired by Obama, the White House Staff created a video in support of  It Gets Better  project.  White House Staff, YouTube

In October 2011 a number of Members of Parliament from the  Conservative Party of Canada  made a video in support of the project. [9]

As noted above, in January 2012,  Vox Day  reported that two gay teens who had made videos It Gets Better Project died by suicide.(see also:  Mental Health and Homosexuality ). [6]  Vox Day also indicated that it doesn't get better and that homosexuality is a deviate lifestyle that homosexual propagandist promote (see:  Homosexuality and choice  and  Ex-homosexuals ). [6]

Various benefactors are partnered with the project including:  GLSEN ,  ACLU , and  The Trevor Project .

See also:   Homosexual activists' ideology and loss of life  and  Homosexuality and health

The  Family Research Council  offered the following glimpse of how untruthful homosexual ideology resulted in the loss of human life: