Jacksonian Democracy  was the political philosophy of the  Second Party System  in the United States in the 1820s to 1840s, especially the positions of President  Andrew Jackson  and his followers in the new  Democratic Party . Historians coined the term to recognize Jackson's primary role, and to include both  democracy  (the rule of the people) and Democracy (a common name for the  Democratic Party ). The  Jacksonians  supported the expansion of  slavery .

Jacksonian Democracy has some elements that appeal to modern  conservatives —but so too the rival  Whig  position has conservative admirers.

Jackson's Democratic Party and it philosophy was resisted by the rival  Whig Party , led by  Henry Clay  and  Daniel Webster . More broadly, the term refers to the period of the  Second Party System  (1824-1854) when  Jacksonian  philosophy was ascendant as well as the spirit of that era.  It can be contrasted with the characteristics of  Jeffersonian Democracy , which dominated the  First Party System . The Jacksonian era saw a great increase of respect and power for the common man; before the era began the electorate had already been expanded to include all white male adult  citizens , [1]  but now they exercised decisive  political  power.  Turnout rose as new  campaign techniques  were used to mass the party-as-army at the polls on election day, with the victor getting the "spoils" of lucrative public office.

Broadly, Jacksonian democracy, in contrast to the  Jeffersonian  era, promoted the strength of the  executive branch  and the  presidency  at the expense of  Congressional  power, while also seeking to broaden the  public 's participation in government. Jacksonians believed in enfranchising all white men, rather than just the propertied class, and supported the  patronage  system that enabled politicians to appoint their supporters into administrative offices, arguing it would reduce the power of  elites  and prevent  aristocracies  from emerging.  They demanded elected (not appointed)  judges  and rewrote many state constitutions to reflect the new values. In national terms the Jacksonians favored geographical expansion, justifying it in terms of  Manifest Destiny . There was usually a consensus among both Jacksonians and Whigs that battles over  slavery  should be avoided. The Jacksonian Era lasted roughly from Jackson's election until the slavery issue became dominant after 1850 and the  American Civil War  dramatically reshaped American politics and the  Third Party System  emerged. Historian Charles Sellers argued in  The Market Revolution  (1991) that the movement toward  democracy  was neutralized and overwhelmed by the coming of  capitalism  in what he called "The Market Revolution."

Jacksonian democracy comprised several principles:

In  The Market Revolution: Jacksonian America, 1815-1846  (1991), Charles Sellers argued that the greatest transformation of the first half of the nineteenth century—indeed, the defining event in American and even in world history—was a revolution from an agrarian to a capitalist society. “Establishing capitalist hegemony over economy, politics, and culture, the market revolution created ourselves and most of the world we know,” Sellers concluded.  Howe (2007) makes three objections to Sellers’s thesis. First, the market revolution happened much earlier, in the eighteenth century. Second, it was not the tragedy of modernity replacing traditionalism that Sellers makes it out to be, because “most American family farmers welcomed the chance to buy and sell in larger markets,” and they were right to, since selling their crops made their lives better. Stuff was cheaper: a mattress that cost fifty dollars in 1815 (which meant that almost no one owned one) cost five in 1848 (and everyone slept better). Finally, retorts Howe, the revolution that really mattered was the “communications revolution”: the invention of the telegraph, the expansion of the postal system, improvements in printing technology, and the growth of the newspaper, magazine, and book-publishing industries.  In a debate with Sellers, Howe asked. "What if people really were benefiting in certain ways from the expansion of the market and its culture? What if they espoused middle-class tastes or evangelical religion or (even) Whig politics for rational and defensible reasons? What if the market was not an actor (as Sellers makes it) but a resource, an instrumentality, something created by human beings as a means to their ends?" Sellers summarized Howe’s argument as "Market delivers eager self-improvers from stifling Jacksonian barbarism" as against his own summary, "Go-getter minority compels everybody else to play its competitive game of speedup and stretch-out or be run over." [2]

John Quincy Adams  was the first president ever to be partially elected by the common citizenry, as the 1824 Presidential election was the first in which all free white men without property could vote.  Issues of social class have been much discussed by historians (Wilentz 1982).

The  Anti-Masonic Party , an opponent of Jackson, introduced the national nominating conventions to select a party's presidential and vice presidential candidates, allowing more voter input.

Jackson, a hero of the  War of 1812 , was a rough-hewn, dueling frontiersman who rejected the norms of polite Eastern society.

The period 1824–32 was politically chaotic.  The  Federalist Party  was dead.  With no effective opposition, the old Jeffersonian Republican party withered away. Every state had numerous political factions, but they did not cross state lines.  Political coalitions formed and dissolved, and politicians moved in and out of alliances.

Many former Democratic-Republicans supported Jackson; others, such as  Henry Clay , opposed him.  Most former Federalists, such as  Daniel Webster , opposed Jackson, although some, like  James Buchanan , supported him. In 1828,  John Quincy Adams  pulled together a network of factions called the National Republicans, but he was defeated by Jackson's coalition.

The system stabilized in 1832-34, as the National Republicans joined with other anti-Jacksonians, especially the  Anti-Masonic Party , to form the  Whig party .  The Democrats and Whigs now battled it out nationally and in every state, with the Democrats have a slight edge before 1848, and after that a larger advantage so the Whigs seldom won.

Jackson fulfilled his promise of broadening the influence of the citizenry in government, although not without controversy over his methods.

Jacksonian policies included ending the bank of the United States, expanding westward, and removing  American Indians  from the Southeast. Jackson was denounced as a tyrant by  Henry Clay  and  John C. Calhoun . Jacksonian democracy had a lasting impact on allowing for more political participation from the average citizen, though Jacksonian democracy itself largely was taken over by the  Copperheads  and became the outsider faith, as practiced by  William Jennings Bryan  in the 1890s. The mainstream of politics, starting with the 1860 election of  Abraham Lincoln  was the new  Republican Party .

Jacksonian democracy was blamed for the economic  Panic of 1837 , which ruined the presidency of  Martin Van Buren  and led to the Whig victory in 1840.

Jackson created a system to clear out elected officials in government of an opposing party and replace them with his supporters as a reward for their electioneering.  With Congress controlled by his enemies Jackson relied heavily on the power of the veto to block their moves.

Martin Van Buren , Jackson's second vice president and the key organizer of the Democratic party, followed Jackson to the White House. Because the Democrats took the blame for the nationwide economic depression that followed the  Panic of 1837 , Van Buren was ousted by Whig  William H. Harrison  in 1840 in a campaign marked by very high turnout nationwide.  The Whigs learned they could appeal to the average (or above average) voter successfully. Harrison died just 30 days into his term, and his vice president,  John Tyler  was an ex-Democrat who was expelled by the Whig Party for abandoning its principles. Tyler was succeeded by  James Polk , a staunch Jacksonian. After the Mexican War, both parties were troubled by the slavery issue, and the Whigs collapsed in 1852 and vanished by 1854. They were replaced in the North by the new  Republican party , formed in 1854.