Jane Fonda  (born New York, December 21, 1937) is an American actress, political activist, and latterly fitness guru. She is the daughter of  Henry Fonda  and sister of  Peter Fonda . She rose to prominence in the 1960s with films such as  Walk on the Wild Side  (1962), in which she played a prostitute and for which she won a Golden Globe as Most Promising Newcomer;  Sunday in New York  (1963) and the comedy western  Cat Bellou  (1965), which was nominated for five  Oscars  and established her bankability as a star.

The science-fiction film  Barbarella  (1968), directed by Frenchman Roger Vadim, her first husband, established Fonda as a  sex  symbol. Her marriage to Vadim, which lasted from 1965 to 1973, brought her into contact with  left-wing  intellectuals and may have had a role in her political radicalization.

She supported the  Civil Rights  movement and opposed the  Vietnam War , particularly through involvement with the  front group   Vietnam Veterans Against the War  (VVAW).  She was also a vocal supporter of the  Black Panthers .

In July–August 1972, Fonda visited  Hanoi , where she spoke out against the war. Her detractors labeled her "Hanoi Jane", comparing her to war propagandists  Tokyo Rose  and Hanoi Hannah. She was controversially photographed seated on an anti-aircraft gun, which angered many American supporters of the war. The following is a sample of what she had to say while in Hanoi:

She made approximately eight radio addresses, during which she told American pilots in the area:

Fonda also quoted  Ho Chi Minh  during some of these broadcasts. She referred to President Richard Nixon as a "new-type  Hitler ," and advised South Vietnamese soldiers to desert: "You are being used as cannon fodder for U.S.  imperialism ."

These radio addresses were aired repeatedly by the North Vietnamese  communists  (Vietcong).

"I've spoken to many peasants who talked about the days when their parents had to sell themselves to landlords as virtually slaves, when there were very few schools and much illiteracy, inadequate medical care, when they were not masters of their own lives.

"But now, despite the bombs, despite the crimes being committed against them by  Richard Nixon , these people own their own land, build their own schools ... illiteracy is being wiped out, there is no more prostitution as there was during the time when this was a French  colony . In other words, the people have taken power into their own hands, and they are controlling their own lives.

"And after 4,000 years of struggling against nature and foreign invaders -- and the last 25 years, prior to the revolution, of struggling against French  colonialism  -- I don't think that the people of Vietnam are about to compromise in any way, shape or form about the freedom and independence of their country, and I think Richard Nixon would do well to read Vietnamese history, particularly their poetry, and particularly the poetry written by  Ho Chi Minh ." [1]

In a 1988 interview, she said, "I will go to my grave regretting the photograph of me in an anti-aircraft gun, which looks like I was trying to shoot at American planes. It hurt so many soldiers. It galvanized such hostility. It was the most horrible thing I could possibly have done. It was just thoughtless." [2]  In her 2005 autobiography she claimed she had been manipulated into posing in the photographs.

Fonda married political activist  Tom Hayden  in 1973 following her divorce from Roger Vadim. She and Hayden had a son, Troy (born 1973), and they also unofficially adopted the teenage daughter of members of the  Black Panthers .  Fonda divorced Hayden in 1989, and married  CNN  founder  Ted Turner  in 1991. They divorced in 2001, after Fonda declared her conversion to  Christianity . In a  New Yorker  article Turner, who sometimes described himself as an  atheist , sometimes an  agnostic , linked his wife's espousal of  religion  with the breakdown of their marriage:

“I had absolutely no warning about it. She didn’t tell me she was thinking about doing it. She just came home and said, ‘I’ve become a Christian.’ Before that, she was not a religious person. That’s a pretty big change for your wife of many years to tell you. That’s a shock. I mean, normally that’s the kind of thing your wife or husband would discuss with you before they did it or while they were thinking about it .... Obviously, we weren’t communicating very well at that time.”
“My becoming a Christian upset him very much — for good reason,” Fonda says. “He’s my husband and I chose not to discuss it with him — because he would have talked me out of it. He’s a debating champion. [3]

Fonda was nominated for seven  Academy Awards , and won two as Best Actress, for  Klute  (1971) and  Coming Home  (1978).

She announced her retirement from screen acting in the early 1990s, but returned to the screen in the movie  Monster-in-Law  (2005).  In 2009 she played Katherine Brandt in Moises Kaufman's  33 Variations  on Broadway, in which role she received a Tony nomination.

In April 1999, Jane Fonda was honored by  ABC News  and  Ladies Home Journal  as one of the "100 Most Important Women of the 20th Century".

Apart from acting, Fonda is also known for a series of workout tapes she produced which gained prominence in the early 1980s.

Fonda's controversial stance on the Vietnam war continues to haunt her. In July 2011, viewer protests caused the cancellation of a planned TV appearance on the QVC shopping channel, about which she had the following to say:

"The network said they got a lot of calls yesterday criticizing me for my opposition to the Vietnam War and threatening to boycott the show if I was allowed to appear. I am, to say the least, deeply disappointed that QVC caved to this kind of insane pressure by some well funded and organized political extremist groups. And that they did it without talking to me first. I have never shied away from talking about this … Many people have reached out to express how excited they were about my going onto QVC and hearing about my book."