The  Kant-Laplace  nebular hypothesis  (sometimes referred to also as 'theory') makes an attempt to explain the origin and development of the  Solar system  within the framework of  naturalism . In 1775, the famous German Philosopher and forerunner of  evolutionism ,  Immanuel Kant , [1]  although highly versed in neither  physics  nor  mathematics , [2]  anonymously published his views on origin of Earth, later coined as nebular hypothesis. There in he advanced his belief that hard particles of matter collided with one another by gravitational attraction, and generated heat and rotation in this process. [3]  Kant’s central idea that the solar system began as a cloud of dispersed particles was further developed and articulated by French astronomer Pierre-Simon Laplace in his 1796 book  Système du monde  ("The System of the World"). In his modification, he let the planets to be formed before the Sun. Although first the telescopic discovery of 'gas nebulas' in space by the great English observational astronomer William Hershel was interpreted as persuasive evidence for the Kant-Laplace nebular hypothesis, [4]  later it was effectively falsified by discoveries related to the  Uranus . [1]  This planet is tilted on its side in such a way, that its axis lies nearly in level with its path around the sun. [5] [6]  Uranus spins clockwise, or in a retrograde fashion, about its north pole, which is opposite to the prograde spin of Earth and most of the other planets. [7]  This makes assumptions on the common direction of rotational motion of all planets coming from parental spinning disk hardly maintainable. [note 1]  Hypothesis was also criticised by British physicist  James Clerk Maxwell   [9]  and British mathematician and astrophysicist James Jeans. [10]  Maxwell was awarded the Adams prize in Cambridge for his outstanding 1859 essay  "On the Stability of Saturn's Rings" , where he i.a. mathematically disproved the nebular hypothesis of his time which stated that the solar system was formed through the condensation of a purely gaseous nebula without any solid particles present. [9]  Jeans calculated how massive a cloud must be so that gravity can overcome the tendency for gas to expand and found out that no star could have formed this way. [10]

Kant’s cosmology was just an introit, an introduction to his anthropology that was at center of his attention. [1] 
 Jonathan Sarfati  points out that for materialistic  evolutionists  who reject a  Creator  a priori , the failed nebular hypothesis is still the leading candidate to fulfill their need to come up with another explanation than one  revealed  in the  Genesis . [10] 
The theory was part of discussion in controversy over the  Age of the Earth  where initial temperature, temperature gradient, and heat loss played an important role. Early in the 20th century the hypothesis was succeeded with a newer idea coming from T.C. Chamberlin who replaced the material for accumulation by cold, solid particles and rocks that he called ‘ planetesimals ’. [11] [12]  
The outer giant planets,  Uranus  and  Neptune , pose a serious challenge to naturalistic theories of planet formation. They exist in a region of the solar system where long dynamical timescales and a low primordial density of material would have conspired to make the formation of such large bodies very difficult. [13]  According to journal  Astronomy Magazine  (2000), bodies orbited so slowly in the outer parts of the Sun's protoplanetary disk that the slow process of gravitational accretion would need more than the [evolutionary] age of the solar system to form bodies with 14.5 and 17.1 times the mass of earth. [14]

The version of this theory from 1923 can be summarized as follows: [15]

Under the nebular hypothesis, the whole Solar system originally consisted of nebular cloud of dust and very thin gases in the spherical shape. The radius of this hot ball exceeded the distance between the center of present-day Sun and orbit of Neptune. By means of mutual gravitational attraction, the dispersed particles have been accreted thus part of them coalesced to form a core around which the remaining ones began a rotational motion from west to east associated with the formation of spheroid flattened on both poles. At the same time, the primordial solar nebula advanced through space in the same direction as the present-day Sun and radiated vast volumes of heat causing its own cooling and contracting in this process. The contraction speeded up the rotational motion resulting in even bigger flattening on the poles and accretion of matter at equatorial plane. On the contrary, rotation with such great rapidity developed strong centrifugal force that has gradually overcome the gravitational attraction. This led to the successive throwing off the outermost matter from equatorial disk in the form of rings which, having heterogeneously diffused materials in line with their densities reassembled as spheres. This process created Neptune, and, after him, remaining planets successively originated the same way, keeping revolving in concentric orbits, in the same direction and almost on the same plane as primordial parental nebular disk. The theory assumes that small  asteroids  between inner and outer planets came most likely from separated rings that disintegrated into multiple chunks.  Finally, the residual core of the ancestral solar nebula condensed to a degree that rendered further divisions of material rings impossible; it remained hot and gaseous to present day – this is our  Sun .

Furthermore, Kant-Laplace theory maintains that at the time of separation from ancestral solar nebula, our Earth was a hot molten gaseous sphere. This ball again, by virtue of centrifugal force, ejected a ring that rolled up into another sphere thus forming Earth’s Moon. By means of radiating energy into surrounding cold space, the Earth gradually cooled and contracted more and more thus turning into some kind of lava, and, at the end, thickened at the surface into solid crust covering hot Earth’s interior until the present day. On the cooling Earth’s surface, hot vapors and gases condensed into water, and atmosphere also originated as by product of this process.