Koji Ariyoshi  was born on January 30, 1914, at Kona, T. H. He attended the University of Hawaii from 1937 to 1940, and the University of Georgia during the 1940-41 term, where he received his bachelor's degree in journalism.

In 1941,  Office of Strategic Services  head  William J. Donovan  opened the door for  communist  infiltration of the United States intelligence service by asking  Eugene Dennis  of the  CPUSA  Politburo to provide veterans of the  Spanish Civil War  who could be used behind enemy lines. The American communists consulted with  Moscow  who advised that American communists could join the OSS as individuals but not as an organized group for fear of having the communist networks discovered. [1]   Koji Ariyoshi was one of the Communist Party members that penetrated the OSS. [2]

In January 1944 Ariyoshi departed for the China-Burma-India theater where he was assigned to work with the Chinese Communists, consequently coming in contact with  Mao Zedong  (Mao Tse-tung) and  Zhou Enlai  (Chou En-Lai). Ariyoshi was commissioned a second lieutenant in June 1945 and remained in the same type of work until January 5, 1946, when his request to be discharged in China was granted. Subsequent to his discharge, he became employed with the  Office of War Information  as a field representative.

Koji Ariyoshi established the  Honolulu Record  after  World War II .

Ariyoshi's reaction concerning his experiences in Communist China were reflected in an article appearing under his name in the February 1947 issue of  Spotlight on the Far East , published by the  Committee for a Democratic Far Eastern Policy , which had been cited as a Communist  subversive  organization on the  Attorney General's list  by  Truman  Attorney General  Tom C. Clark . In this issue Ariyoshi wrote a guest column in support of the Chinese Communists. The March and June 1949 issues of  Far East Spotlight , successor to  Spotlight on the Far East , lists Ariyoshi as a consultant to the Committee for a Democratic Far Eastern Policy.

The Hawaii Star  of April 23, 1948, reflects that a progress report on the New York Chapter of the  Hawaii Civil Liberties Committee  (HCLC) was made by Koji Ariyoshi, one of the founders of this chapter, at an HCLC meeting in Honolulu on April 20, 1948. The HCLC was cited as being a Communist subversive organization by the Attorney General of the United States on April 28, 1949. The HCLC was also cited as a subversive organization initiated and operated by Communists for the sole purpose of expanding the influence of the small Communist minority in the Territory of Hawaii by the  Committee on Un-American Activities  in a report to the House of Representatives on June 23, 1950.

In April 1951 the  Honolulu Record  under Koji Ariyoshi's editorial guidance was accused of Maoist  deviationism  by its CPUSA overlords. [3]  
The same year Ariyoshi was arrested along with John and Aiko Reinecke, Jack Hall of the ILWU, and others for  Smith Act  violations.

In 1978 a pamphlet eulogizing Ariyoshi was published in Los Angeles by the U.S. - Chinese Peoples Friendships Association. It was later reprinted, in 2004, in hard cover by Foreign Languages Press in Beijing.  According to the official Chinese Foreign Languages Press,

The book was edited by Hugh Deane, who had been on the editorial board of  China Monthly Review  and pleaded the  5th Amendment  when asked if he was a Communist Party member by the  Senate Subcommittee on Internal Security . The Forward to the book was written by  John Stewart Service , a State Department official who stole a large number of classified documents and turned them over to the communist magazine  Amerasia .  Service was indicted by a Grand Jury for  espionage , but a  Soviet  agent employed by the  White House  named  Lauchlin Currie  hired former  FDR  Presidential assistant  Thomas Corcoran  as Services defense attorney.  Corcoran persuaded high level  Truman  Justice Department officials to coverup the case.  The  Soviet intelligence  service, the NKVD, had several agents among the communists working in  Amerasia . Two had been identified by true name and code name in the  Venona  intercepts.  One was  Thomas Arthur Bisson , code name "Artur". The other was  Joseph Milton Bernstein , code name: "Markiz". [4]

According to Hugh Deane in his eulogy to Koji Ariyoshi, "In February of 1945 John S. Service, the chief political officer of the Yenan mission, and his Foreign Service colleagues attached to the U.S. Embassy in Chunking urged in a carefully prepared policy recommendation that the U.S. desist from giving exclusive support to the  Chiang Kai-shek  regime...."

Soviet agents and American communists in China had actively subverted President Roosevelt's policy of support for the  Chinese Nationalist  government of Chiang Kai-shek, an ally of the  United States  during World War II.

In the forward to the eulogy to Koji Ariyoshi, John Stewart Service wrote: