Leftist  refers to someone on the far-Left side of the  political spectrum , perhaps initially a  moderate  but then more  liberal , such as a  progressive ,  socialist ,  Communist  or a particularly liberal member of the  American   Democrat Party .   A leftist supports collectivism, more government control of the economy, direct government control over social policy, including Federal control over education at all levels, lower  military  spending, censorship of religion, a  living constitution ,  same-sex "marriages" , a more unisex society,  globalism ,  transnationalism ,  feminism , the  homosexual agenda , taxpayer-funded  abortion , and  censorship  of  Christianity  in public places.

See also:   Secular left  and  History of atheism  and  French Revolution

During the French  Reign of Terror  of the early  Enlightenment , the Left attempted a de-Christianization movement to replace the "reactionary" worship of God and replace it with the worship of national patriotism, or the  Patrie .  Many churches were closed and either converted into Temples of Reason, [1]  or otherwise demolished outright under the order of Jacobin leader  Maximilien de Robespierre  under the pretense that their design was "undemocratic." [2]  The Left even formed a new calendar  secularizing Christian holidays . This calendar was short lived though and was never accepted in the rural, more religious parts of France. In addition, it was also stated that the Left-wing had some origins in the  Book of Revelations  when Jesus transfigured people on his right and left as sheep and goats, respectively.

Karl Marx  (May 5, 1818 [3]  – March 14, 1883) was a  bourgeois [4]  political pamphleteer, [5]  polemicist [6]  and  propagandist , [7]  credited as co-founder (with  Friedrich Engels ) of communism [8]  and specifically of Marxism. Although Marx always considered himself an economist, [9]  "the Marxist system as a whole is not regarded as economics by the mainstream," according to Don Ross, co-editor of  The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Economics . [10]  Ex-Marxist [11]  economist  Thomas Sowell  agrees:

William Coleman of the Australian National University actually goes so far as to identify Marx as an "anti-economist." [13]  Ross concurs, labeling Marx "the most influential anti-economist of all." [14]  Even Michael Harrington, a well-known Marxist, [15]  in his book,  The Twilight of Capitalism , devoted an entire chapter to Marx "The anti-economist." [16]  Nevertheless, men and women of zeal, often well-meaning but without understanding [17]  of economics, ravaged the 20th century reifying Marx's anti-economics—in the process killing more people than all the century's wars combined. [18]

Anarchist thinker Mikhail Bakunin critiqued prominent leftist theoritician  Karl Marx  in 1873 with these words,

It should be noted that Bakunin was also a leftist, and in fact, the only difference he had from Marx was the exact extent that they should get rid of government. In addition, he also declared regarding anarchism: "Let us put our trust in the eternal spirit which destroys and annihilates only because it is the unsearchable and eternally creative source of all life--the passion for destruction is also a creative passion!" [20]

In the United States men such as  Eugene Debs , Maurice Hilquit and  Norman Thomas  believed they could, by a gradual series of alterations in the structure of society, create a truly democratic world in which all people would enjoy not merely freedom, but prosperity. They believed this could not be achieved under the system of  private property  and  profit . They advocated a gradual acquisition by the State of all the great utilities, transportation, communication, and basic industries such as coal, oil, and steel.

The dream of a cooperative commonwealth in which all would share equally in the prosperity created by an economic system owned by the people was the vision of  Socialists .  This in theory would end  poverty ,  ignorance  and  crises .  The idea was to  nationalize  banks, railroads, all means of transport, mines, and a few basic industries, but leave some factories, stores, farms, entertainment industries, etc., in the hands of private owners. The government would assume responsibility for making the economy work, for the well-being of all the citizens, their protection from the hazards of life, poverty, sickness, and old age. To make the whole economy work continuously without occasional  boom-bust  cycles, the government would create  economic planning  boards staffed by a bureaucratic class which would continuously study and observe the functioning of the economic system and make plans covering production, prices, distribution, financing, profits,  wages , hours, etc. Thus there would be Planned Capitalism, with the State responsible for the planning and for ensuring the carrying out of its plans through great government bureaus armed with the necessary powers to enforce compliance.

In the 1920s  Benito Mussolini  had adopted the Planned Capitalist State and gave it the name " fascism ".  Adolf Hitler  adopted the same idea and called it  National Socialism . Mussolini and Hitler both realized that a system which imposes a vast complex of decrees upon a people while subjecting them to confiscatory  taxes  to support the immense activities of the government cannot be operated except by an  absolute  government that has the power to enforce compliance. Prior to  World War II , this type of system had spread all over Europe. For nearly 70 years all the countries in Europe, with Germany in the lead, had been experimenting with the idea of the  welfare state , the State which attempts to provide its people with jobs and protection from all the hazards of life.

This system is the direct opposite of  classical liberalism . It is the negation of the classical liberal philosophy which for decades has been fighting to  emancipate  the people from the  tyranny  of the all powerful State. During the  New Deal  this doctrine became known in America as "liberalism". Liberals did not admit that it implied the restoration to the State those very powers which had been stripped from the State as the means of giving people  freedom . They called it the  Planned Economy . But it was and is fascism by whatever name it is known. Incrementally the government must be made stronger, and the rights of the citizens reduced.

Modern leftists in the United States have come under increasing criticism as advocates of thought control. [21]   Author David Limbaugh cites, "Consider the subjects of  evolution ,  global warming ,  special rights for homosexuals  and  abstinence  education. Consider efforts of the Left to  silence conservative talk radio . Consider the mainstream media's arrogant denial of its transparent  liberal bias , pronouncing itself to be above politics and inherently objective and its critics somehow skewed....Consider the leftist refrain that  red state  conservatives do not merely possess a different world view, but are not part of the 'reality-based community.'"

See:   Decline of the secular left

See also:   Atheism and mockery

In a  BloombergView  article, Stephen L. Carter wrote about the Left:

Historically,  atheists  have skewed towards the  left  side of the political aisle (see:  Atheism and politics  and  Secular left  and  Atheism and communism ). [23] [24] [25] [26] [27]

Although the  secular left  is known for ridiculing  religion  since at least the time of  French Revolution  (see:  Atheism and mockery ), the secular Left is known for its humorlessness when it comes to others mocking of its ideology (See also:  Atheism and humor  and  Atheism and intolerance  and  Atheist hypocrisy ).