Libertarianism  is a  political philosophy  that believes in minimizing or entirely eliminating government interventionism in many aspects of life including economic, personal, and in foreign policy matters. Libertarians tend to oppose legal restrictions on social behavior that doesn't affect anybody else. The  French   term  of  Laissez-Faire , or  let us do , is a term that describes some aspects of the libertarian belief. [1]   Libertarianism tends to emphasize a form of individual  liberty , and tends to support rights of private property.

The first systematic libertarian was  Herbert Spencer  (1820-1903), an English political philosopher whose books such as  The Man Versus the State   (1884) had a major impact in Europe and America in the late 19th century. [2]  The chief American representative was  Yale  professor  William Graham Sumner .

Ronald Reagan  stated in 1975, "I believe the very heart and soul of conservatism is libertarianism....The basis of conservatism is a desire for less government interference or less centralized authority or more individual freedom and this is a pretty general description also of what libertarianism is....Now, I can’t say that I will agree with all the things that the present group who call themselves Libertarians in the sense of a party say, because I think that like in any political movement there are shades, and there are libertarians who are almost over at the point of wanting no government at all or anarchy. I believe there are legitimate government functions. There is a legitimate need in an orderly society for some government to maintain freedom or we will have tyranny by individuals." [3]

In the United States, libertarians are typically fiscally conservative and socially liberal using the common US meanings of liberal and conservative. A faction of libertarians exist in the GOP, and are typically more ardent than other members of the GOP in keeping the principle of fiscal sanity and are less willing to "sell out" those principles for political expediency. They support an isolationist foreign policy and are to the left of most Democrats on social and foreign policy issues. The foremost libertarian figure in the GOP is former long-time Congressman  Ron Paul .

Libertarianism is best summed up in the Non-Aggression Principle, which states that government (or "private police agencies" in the anarcho-capitalist variant) should only exist to protect life, liberty, and property from force and fraud.

Libertarianism is closely related to liberalism, if this word is interpreted according to its original meaning of  classical liberalism . Libertarians in America tend to be  liberal  on social issues but  conservative  on economic issues. Libertarians generally oppose government regulation of drugs, prostitution, and marriage (including bans of  same-sex marriage ). The Libertarian Party officially supports legalized  abortion , however, libertarians themselves are divided on the issue, since government protection from force depends on the personhood of the unborn baby (or fetus). However, libertarians are uniformly opposed to government funding for abortions (such as through  Planned Parenthood ). Furthermore, they oppose restrictions on  pornography . However, they also oppose  universal health care ,  taxes  and the  welfare state . They are strong supporters of  school choice , and oppose continuing the  public school  system. Some libertarians support  school vouchers , while others are skeptical due to the issue of government influence over  private education .

Libertarians support an expansive view of liberty as the proper basis for organizing civil society. They tend to define liberty as the freedom to do whatever one wishes up to the point that one's behavior begins to interfere with another's person or property through coercive means. At the point of interference, each party would become subject to certain principled rules for adjudicating disputes, generally accepting that one who has demonstrated a proven lack of respect for the rights of others should be subject to sanctions, including possible constraints on their freedom. They believe that liberty is the right of every individual.

Libertarians generally defend the ideal of freedom from the perspective of how little one is constrained by authority, i.e., how much one is allowed to do (also referred to as negative liberty). This ideal is distinguished from a view of freedom focused on how much one is able to do (also called positive liberty).

See also:   Atheism and politics

According to Murray N. Rothbard, who writes for the  Ludwig von Mises Institute , most libertarians at the present time are  atheists . [4]   Ayn Rand  was a libertarian and atheist.

Rothbard also declares:

Both  Ron Paul  and  Rand Paul  are religious libertarians.

Libertarians tend to use the word "libertarian" (small "l") to refer to the philosophy, and "Libertarian" (capital "L") to refer to the party. Thus, more libertarians exist than members of the  Libertarian Party . Two general factions exist in the libertarian movement. The first are those libertarians who apply the principles of right to person and property to an absolute. They believe that no person, group, or government is above the right to violate these two things. They thus believe that government itself is illegitimate because it violates person and property. These libertarians subscribe to  anarcho-capitalism , as first named by  Murray N. Rothbard . They believe that law and security can be handled by private means in the free market. The other faction believes in a very limited government. They are often referred to as  minarchists . Libertarian minarchists want the state to only enforce law and order but generally nothing else.  Ayn Rand  was a minarchist.

Libertarians tend to view liberalism as a philosophy advocating less government interference in private morality and more government control of business, and view conservatism as a philosophy advocating more government interference in private morality and less government control of business, while they view libertarianism as advocating less government control in all areas. However, there have been fusionist attempts to mix libertarianism and with social conservatism. This is noted in particular by  paleolibertarians . They believe that social conservatism is a natural entity in a free society, but do not believe that it can be enforced by state interventionism. For instance, they may personally oppose  homosexuality , but advocate for  marriage privatization  rather than believing that government should sanction "marriage" exclusively between a man and a woman.

Outside the United States, the term "libertarian" refers to  left-wing anarchism .

While there are libertarian factions within the  Democratic  and  Republican   parties , neither party is particularly well aligned with libertarian thought. While the Republican Party sometimes adopts libertarian-sounding rhetoric of small government in economic affairs, many libertarians see it as being a force that has increased government interventionism in these affairs. Libertarians generally, for example, are opposed to the  USA PATRIOT Act , which they believe increases government power and removes protections on the liberty and privacy of the public. Most conservatives, on the other hand, view it as a necessary government program and believe security to be more important than personal liberty and privacy. Libertarians point out that such a view contradicts those of the founding fathers, such as Benjamin Franklin, who  summarized it most eloquently, "Those who would give up Essential Liberty to purchase a little Temporary Safety, deserve neither Liberty nor Safety." Libertarians are also generally opposed to the  Iraq War , unlike the majority of conservatives.

While all libertarians agree in general on the principles of the desirability of maximizing individual liberty and avoiding excessive government interference with the operation of the free market, individual libertarians have opinions that differ wildly within these general principles.

The libertarian movement generally praises the  United States Constitution , regarding it as the proper scope of the national government. They believe that the Democratic and Republican parties have overstepped constitutional limits. Anarcho-capitalist libertarians, on the other hand, view the implementation of the constitution as the very reason the national government is the size it is today.

Libertarian-oriented writers include  Frédéric Bastiat ,  William Leggett ,  John Stuart Mill ,  Henry David Thoreau ,  Lysander Spooner ,  Herbert Spencer ,  William Graham Sumner ,  Carl Menger ,  Ludwig von Mises , Rose Wilder Lane,  Albert Jay Nock ,  Henry Hazlett , and  Isabel Paterson . Science fiction writers;  L. Neil Smith ,  J. Neil Schulman , and  Brad Linaweaver . Several popular financial writers including  Harry Browne  and  Howard J. Ruff . Browne would later run for President, twice, on the Libertarian Party ticket. Ruff declared his political philosophy as libertarian but as a socially conservative  Mormon  made an exception on issues like abortion and prostitution, where he disagreed with the libertarian view. Nobel Laureate economists  Milton Friedman ,  F.A. Hayek ,  Ronald Coase , Gary Becker, James Buchanan,  George Stigler , and Vernon Smith. Humorist  Dave Barry , actor/comedian  Drew Carey , actor  Denis Leary , former MTV VJ  Lisa "Kennedy" Montgomery , actor  Kurt Russell , investigative reporter  John Stossel , and the late rocker  Frank Zappa  have all referred to themselves as being aligned with or openly supporting the Libertarian Party. Many Republican congressmen and senators hold libertarian positions, such as  Walter B. Jones ,  Rand Paul , and  Justin Amash .

The most influential libertarian of the 20th century was  Milton Friedman  (1912-2006), a leader of the  Chicago School of Economics .