Liberal myths  are heavily promoted falsehoods motivated by a destructive belief system.

Liberal beliefs include: [1]

The liberal belief that an individual can claim to support our military, just not the mission and still be considered a 'Patriot'. In fact, the exact opposite is the truth. A liberals patriotism, party-specific position, cannot support the troops if they are an impediment to their political left-wing strategy. The main reason for this has to due with passionate, partisan hatred for George Bush as commander in chief, the  President of the United States of America . Liberals claim to support the military, claim not to support the mission and refuse to support the Commander. The extremist left discounts the counter effect of troop morale. Understanding the true liberal mindset when it comes to supporting our U.S. troops, observe the often tried protest march. Though frustration boils over, actions lead from protest to outright sabotage or anarchism. [38]  Liberal credibility fails and lack of concern for the support of America shows.  The left-wing cares so much for our military they condone and actually prop up politicians that abuse troops with reckless accusations, [39]  negative media coverage and ego trips. [40]  Liberal protesters look the other way as war memorials are vandalized. Liberals protest our severely injured soldiers at the Walter Reed Medical Center. [41]  Liberal protesters harass, damage or block military recruitment centers from operating business as-usual. [42]  This leftwing position, the myth is successful in feeding media driven discontent and mediocrity shame. If the news is bad, a liberal is spoon fed. If the news is good, the spoon fed liberal is oblivious. e.g. "a complete suspension of disbelief".

Patriotism, to your brother, who volunteers and risks the ultimate sacrifice out of love, will never be diminished. True patriots will always be in our gratitude and held in the highest light.

The myth liberals give says we need to restore America's image in the world. Again, this mostly has to do with liberals' negative view of  President Bush . Liberals want the two linked even though the myth is false. They blame Bush and Iraq for the bad USA image but the truth is that the credibility of the American left is a worse image than America's image abroad.  The main need for liberals to propagate this myth is the fact that  socialist  governments of Europe oppose the policy of  Iraq . This further fuels liberals' political agenda to remove  Republicans  from power. Liberals love Europeans and cite their false socialist utopia at every chance.  European opposition automatically reinforces their belief that America's image is damaged. As of 2008, most of the  European  leaders that opposed Iraq are no longer in positions of power. The result, European  conservatives  were elected who publicly aligned themselves with America.

Those  liberals  that use the myth and regularly bash the USA are often called the "Blame America First" crowd. Though they never seem to mention that America gives more in donations, in total dollars, than any other country on Earth. [43]  A sure way to change America's image in the world is to show the world we respect life. The repeal of Roe Vs. Wade would be a start.

Reasons why  America  was hated prior to 2003 include wealth, women's rights, support for our democratic ally  Israel , democratic government, capitalist economy and exporting immorality.

In the attempt to point fingers and lay blame, the liberals produce the myth that profits made by successful companies are bad for America. Only a select group of companies are targeted for public shame. This is a false myth because successful corporations actually create jobs and  tax  revenue. Retirement funds and municipal bonds rely heavily on the profits from these companies. Also, the reason these companies flourish is because the capitalist system rewards their hard work. The liberals will try to create sympathy, that they care for the average American, they are the ones going after wrongdoers to make it right.

Liberals  have demonized such companies as RJ Reynolds, Walmart, Halliburton and  Blackwater . Their latest target is Exxon Mobil for their enormous profits and futures market oil speculators. Most of their accusations are absurd. Liberals in  Congress  don't blink an eye when it comes time to spend all that tax revenue generated. Liberals in Congress have been called on their  hypocrisy  for owning stocks in those companies. Which in turn, they divest their portfolios like nothing was ever wrong. For years, for decades, these companies have lobbied members of Congress, they have worked together for their common goals. In return, hefty  campaign  donations are their reward. Then for opportune reasons, liberals will publicly ridicule and verbally attack these bad, greedy capitalists. Corporate heads are brought before congress for a sideshow grilling to explain their actions. [44]  The Windfall Tax is just another example of the sham created by this liberal myth. Those companies make enough money, they should now be forced to give some back. They are threatened with nationalization  [45] 
and further government regulation, a socialist scheme. As the price of gas fell, Congress just pretended like nothing ever happened, Big Oil off the hook.

In an attempt to spread Bush hatred without mentioning his name, it is common for liberals to lie and say  "we're in this economic mess because of the policies over the previous eight years."  This is a myth, perpetuated by the corrupt in order to link bad economics with  Conservatism  and Bush policy.  These liberals are the very same individuals that would not recognize George W. Bush's economic successes when the economy was creating jobs. Bush,  McCain ,  Alan Greenspan  are all on record as trying to fix the corrupt lending policies and government mismanagement for the past eight years. [46]  All the while Democrats were lining their pockets with  Fannie Mae  and  Freddie Mac  donations. Democrats are overwhelmingly responsible if they should point fingers. Democrats  Barney Frank ,  Chris Dodd ,  John Kerry ,  Charles Schumer  and even  Barack Obama  are as much, if not directly, indirectly responsible for the failed economics of this country over the past eight-years. The same people who got us into this mess are now responsible for getting us out of financial meltdown. Blame can go all around on this one, both Republicans and Democrats. This was the result of many bad decisions over a long period of time. Then out of nowhere, financial calamity that nobody saw coming, except congressmen and women who were privy to bank collapses. They made good money while the rest of America suffered. [47]

In an attempt by liberals to claim the  U.S.  committed war crimes after  9/11 , Congress held an investigation into  Enhanced interrogation  by the CIA. The report would absolve the role of Congress, who were advised along the way, and label waterboarding as torture in violation of the Geneva convention. Liberals, backed by comments of Senator  John McCain , would argue that we put Japanese to death for waterboarding. It's a ridiculous notion that waterboarding was reason enough to justify execution.  Japanese  soldiers would beat U.S. servicemen to death, forced labor to death, starved to death. Many lost limbs to sword wielding commanders. [48]  Many U.S. serviceman and civilian contractors were executed without trial. Also, they were waterboarded. If GITMO detainees had it as bad as liberals claim, they wouldn't seek to stay. [49]  To equate enhanced interrogation with torture is a liberal myth.