A  literary type  is any class of characters that might be present in a  novel  (or a  stage  or  motion picture  or  television  script) for any of a variety of purposes. Some types are basic and can be found in most projects. Other types are intended primarily to illustrate a similar class of persons in real life.

At least two types  must  be present in any well-written story (unless the story is entirely event-driven and not character-driven). They are called the  hero  and the  villain —but each of those two names has acquired an often confusing connotation.

A  literary hero  is any character who,  in the course of the story , must make a decision that changes his or her life in order to meet the challenge presented to him or her. The hero is also the  main character  of the story. Opinions differ on how many heroes a story can have before it becomes hopelessly confusing.

Classically, a hero behaves in a virtuous manner, and pursues a goal generally regarded as good. In any context other than the literary, a hero is just that: a virtuous actor in a crisis, and usually one who must act above and beyond the call of civic or other duty, by reason of failure to prevent the crisis by those normally responsible for such prevention.

But a literary hero is different. A hero in a novel or script must make a judgment (for that is what a crisis is, an occasion calling for judgment), and must judge not only the specific circumstances but  also  his current and previous approach to such circumstances. That usually requires him to change his way of thinking about a subject, and might even require him to change his notions of good and evil.

When the hero of a story behaves in a non-virtuous manner, and serves the cause of evil rather than good, he is an  anti-hero.  Some of the most compelling characters in literature are in fact anti-heroes. They might have decided that the notions of the good of all of society are inverted, and that they are the ones pursuing good, regardless of the opinions of the rest of society.

Heroes and anti-heroes are the usual literary types that play the role of  protagonist  in a novel. However,  protagonist  and  antagonist  are, properly speaking, roles rather than types.

Most observers believe that a literary  villain  is simply the story's  antagonist . This is not correct, because the term  villain  describes a mental state and not a role.

A  literary villain  is any character who  never  changes his mind or his goals or his outlook in the course of the novel, unless an overwhelming force, physical or psychological, compels him so to act. A villain approaches life, and his goals, with single-minded determination, and cares nothing of what anyone, ally or adversary or bystander, might think of his actions.

More to the point, the villain will be stopped only by his:

The  anti-villain  is rarely encountered in literature, because most villains do what they do from motives of selfish gain or vengeance, and use methods generally regarded as evil. But occasionally a story will contain one or more single-minded characters who actually are serving the cause of  good  rather than evil, and  justice  rather than mere personal vindication. Such a character is an anti-villain. Like a classical villain, he will be stopped only by death, defeat or surrender. Unlike the classic villain, his cause is just rather than unjust.

An  allegorical type  is any character drawn specifically to resemble a class of persons in real life.

Any character in a work of fiction, whether major or minor, could be an allegorical type. A hero is not usually an allegorical type, but he could be (and an anti-hero is more likely than a hero to be allegorical).

A villain is almost always allegorical, though not necessarily so. An anti-villain, if he is not allegorical, is simply a larger-than-life character that represents an ideal.

Luke Skywalker , in the  Star Wars  cycle, is definitely a hero. Not only does he work with and serve other characters in a just cause, but also—and most important—in the course of the three installments of that cycle in which he appears, Luke Skywalker must make a life-changing decision, based on a perspective that changes his entire sense of his life, and accept the consequences of that decision. It is not enough that Luke Skywalker joins the rebellion and accepts training as a  Jedi Knight  (though he breaks that training at a critical moment, a mistake that nearly costs him his life). As his instructors make clear, he must face a brutal fact: that his father, whom he had long assumed had died by an act of murder, is in fact his foremost antagonist, and that he, Luke, is likely to become just as evil as his father did if he is not careful with the Force with which he has chosen to play.

Anakin Skywalker , also known as  Darth Vader , is clearly the anti-hero of the first three (chronological) installments in the series. He means well to begin with, but in the end succumbs to the blandishments of Senator (later Emperor)  Palpatine  and devotes himself to evil rather than good. In the next three installments, Darth Vader appears as a villain—but in fact Darth Vader is still an anti-hero, and in the very last installment makes the crucial decision to defect from the cause of evil when his own son comes under mortal threat. That decision costs him his life, but in the after-life his former instructors welcome him into the club of old Jedi Knights powerful enough to continue to influence people and events even after death.

Palpatine is, of course, the chief villain in all six installments. Like any villain, he is stopped only by death.  Obi-wan Kenobi  qualifies as a hero in the first three installments and an anti-villain in the next three.

In that novel, and in the  motion picture  based upon it, Professor  Annorax , his aide Conseil, and Able Seaman  Ned Land  are the heroes.  Captain Nemo  is the villain, and displays all the characteristics of one: single-mindedness of purpose, an insane drive for vengeance, and in the end, not stopping until he is fatally wounded.

This novel originally appeared in serial form in a magazine popular during the lifetime of its author,  Alexandre Dumas  the elder ("Dumas-père"). As a result, the identification of the novel's heroes and villains is often confused in the minds of its readers. In fact, Edmond Dantès, the title character, is  not  the hero, and given his total disregard for the lives of his opponents, he behaves as a villain during most of the course of the novel. His sudden decision to preserve rather than sacrifice the lives of Vicomte Albert de Morcerf and Mdlle. Valentine de Villefort is  not  so much a life-changing decision as a voluntary surrender to certain persons who have a claim upon him that he cannot deny. In the end he still considers that he was correct in his pursuit of the three nominal villains (Baron Danglars, Comte Fernand de Morcerf, and Gérard de Villefort), and when he has satisfied the prior claims of Mme. Mercédès, Comtesse de Morcerf and of Maximilien Morrel, he retires completely from Western society, never to appear in it again.

The heroes of this novel are Lieutenant Maximilien Morrel and the above-mentioned Valentine de Villefort, and to a lesser extent Comtesse Mercédès and Vicomte Albert de Morcerf. They are the ones who must struggle to realize their respective goals, and summon all the courage they each possess in order to obtain them. Part of that courage is the decision that each of them makes even to  trust  the Count of Monte-Cristo in their endeavors.

Most readers of this novel by  Ayn Rand  mistakenly identify  John Galt  as the hero. This is not correct, because  John Galt  and his two friends,  Francisco d'Anconia  and  Ragnar Danneskjold , are single-minded men who do not allow anyone's feelings, either theirs or those of any other persons, to deter them from their goals. Because their cause happens to be just, they qualify as anti-villains rather than villains. They are not stopped, and never once do any of these men have the point-of-view in any scene.

The two heroes of  Atlas Shrugged  are, of course,  Dagny Taggart  and  Henry Rearden . Each of these characters must make a life-changing decision and a re-evaluation of the world and its conventions in order to achieve their personal goals.

The novel does have its share of villains, including James Taggart, Wesley Mouch, Floyd Ferris, and Robert Stadler. Ironically, they barely qualify as villains because they display what some regard as the characteristic of insanity: repeating the same action no matter how many times that action proves futile. They are perhaps the most inept villains in the popular literature of the last hundred years.