Conservapedia surpasses 82,000 page views!!!

Remember to  cite your sources .  Conservapedia Commandment  #2 Reads: Always cite your sources.

Participate in the fascinating debate over whether  Benjamin Franklin  was a  deist . Contribute your own evidence this debate!

Did you know that the  Koran  refers to  Allah  with the plural pronoun "we"? The "we" in Christianity represents the  Holy Trinity , but the "we" is unexplained in the  Koran .

Read about  John McCain , the frontrunner for the Republican nomination for president, and why some conservatives do not trust him.

Welcome to 30 new users!!!

Conservapedia surpasses 10,000 in total page edits!!!

Did you know that the process of becoming a Muslim is known as  reverting ? Click the entry to read why.

New entries on Monday, January 22nd:  65  (one-day record: 103)

New Term Lists Started Monday, January 22nd:  26

A  new  one-day record:  103 new, high-quality entries in Conservapedia  on January 18, 2007.  CONGRATULATIONS!

In  homeschooling , see the list of Christian homeschoolers who made a difference in world history.

Did President Franklin Delano Roosevelt know beforehand that the Japanese would be attacking Pearl Harbor? Add here to the entry about the Japanese code  JN-25 .

A  new  one-day record:  67 new, high-quality entries in Conservapedia on January 16, 2007 .  CONGRATULATIONS!

Read and revise  World History Lecture Thirteen , which addresses the 20th century after World War II.

What do we owe to the Greek Empire? Find out  here .

Do you know who Mikhail Kalashnikov was? He's on one of the top ten  most influential  persons in world history.

Who were the ten  most influential  persons in the history of the world?

Can you identify this:  + Who were the  most influential  persons in the history of the world? 
  +  
 See the explanation at  double bond .

Did you know that the Hebrew account of creation in Genesis implies the existence of the Trinity? See for yourself at  Creation .

Why is a  perpetual motion machine  impossible to build? Read and participate in this scientific debate at  Talk:Perpetual motion machine .