Mark Steinbach  is a famous  organist  and  music theorist .  After receiving his Bachelor of Music from the  University of Kansas , he studied at the  Eastman School of Music  where he received his master's degree and a doctorate.  As a  Fulbright Scholar , he studied at the  Hochschule für Musik  in  Vienna .  Steinbach then embarked on a massive career of organ performance, making landmark recordings of the complete organ works of  Beethoven  and  Mozart , as well as his own transcriptions of  Johannes Brahms ' Third Symphony, Schumann's  Dichterliebe , and Haydn's Nelson Mass.  Although Steinbach was not averse to performing showpieces to "shock" the masses, he remained at heart a "musician's musician", to quote his mentor, music theorist Prof.  James Baker , and continued to refine his performances of  Baroque  keyboard works after writing an improved English translation of C.P.E. Bach's  Versuch über die wahre Art das Clavier zu spielen .

In more recent years, Steinbach has become an increasingly important figure in the field of music theory.  He is well known for resolving a dispute between two theorists about the labeling of  chords  that led to a fistfight (although he refuses to discuss the incident) and for his leadership of the movement to restore the study of species counterpoint to the standard curriculum.  He is also a master of sightreading and reading and  improvising  over a  figured bass , such as that of the Minuet from Bach's First Cello Suite.

Steinbach is also an accomplished  pianist , having taken lessons from  Alfred Brendel  and accompanied soprano  Jessye Norman  on some of her recordings.

Steinbach has received many awards for his organ playing, having won the Ottumwa, Iowa National Organ Competition, and received the "Gold Star" from the American Guild of Organists.  He is currently a professor in the Brown University School of Music along with such luminaries as pianist  Arlene Cole ,  conductor   Paul Phillips , and choral director  Fred Jodry , and the organist and chorus director of the historic St. Paul's Church in  Rhode Island . He is amongst the greatest musicians to have almost no presence on  Google  or other mainstream sources. [Citation Needed]