Materialism  is the belief that only  matter  exists, and that nothing unseen exists.  Materialism is a type of  atheism . Materialism holds that all phenomena and processes can be explained as manifestations or results of matter. [1]   In popular culture, materialism refers to an obsession with money and expensive goods that money can buy.

Materialism defies both experience and  logic .  Experience provides numerous  counterexamples  that disprove materialism, such as  migration ,  homing ,  action-at-a-distance  and  non-locality , plus extraordinary good and evil events that lack statistically plausible explanations.  Materialism is also contrary to logic, as there no logical reason to expect human senses to be able to fully recognize all of reality.

Materialism ignores unseen  opportunity costs , and often materialists are unable or unwilling to grasp this and other abstract truths.  Materialists have trouble realizing that the deterrence effect of gun ownership yields more benefits than any  harm that guns cause  cause.  Materialists often develop obsessions with their outlook, as reflected by  evolution syndrome .

The falsehood of materialism causes significant harm, including:

Materialism misleads people into thinking that non-material-based addictions (e.g., gambling and pornography) are not harmful to one's health.  They are often very harmful despite a lack of immediate physical harm.

In politics, materialism overlooks abstract principles and instead focuses on tangible or directly observable characteristics, such as:

In the  United States ,  Democrats  tend to be materialistic, with particularly heavy emphasis placed on race, gender and job title.   Republicans , in contrast, tend to focus on principles such as  family values ,  pro-life  or  economics .

Materialism is taught heavily in  public schools , leading students to undervalue  unseen  aspects of life.  There is a high correlation between materialism and  atheism  as atheism is fundamentally a materialistic philosophy.  Materialism denies that most great intellectual breakthroughs were the brainchild of men with  faith  in the  unseen .

Materialism undermines  science  making it increasingly  atheistic , [2]  rejecting God and his works in explanations of the world and all of human experience. Instead science readily embraces  liberal logic  and pseudo or  junk science  such as  evolution ,  relativity ,  global warming  and much of  cosmology  and  geology  based on a  time frame  which predates  creation . Fortunately the rigid  logic  of  creation science  is gaining in importance, enabling intelligent people to distinguish real science from atheistic secular junk science.

Arguments for materialism commonly use principles such as  Occam's Razor  to propose that an immaterial realm is wholly superfluous to materialists' understanding of the world.

"Materialism" can also refer to an obsession with material goods.

The teachings of  Karl Marx  and  Vladimir Lenin  (see  Marxism-Leninism ) rest upon a philosophy of history called  dialectical materialism .