Maxine Waters  (born August 15, 1938) is a Democratic  United States Representative  from  California . She is an  African-American  woman who represents California's 43rd district in the 113th Congress, which includes South Central  Los Angeles . Waters is a member of the House Committee on Financial Services and the Chairwoman of its Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity. Also, Waters is on the Committee on the Judiciary overseeing Crime,  Terrorism , Homeland Security, Immigration, and Border Security. She is the founding member and Chair of the "Out of  Iraq " Congressional Caucus, a member of the  Progressive Caucus  and the  Congressional Black Caucus . She is known for being an outspoken  liberal  and for espousing socialistic goals. She was a cosponsor of the House resolution to impeach then-Vice President  Dick Cheney  in 2007 for the War in Iraq.

Maxine Waters was born in  St. Louis ,  Missouri . She attended college at  California State University . Before entering politics she was a teacher. Waters is married to Sidney Williams.

Standing up for her constituents, she defended the people involved in the 1992 Los Angeles riots. Waters maintains that to label it a riot was to call people crazy. She understands their motives so she decided to call it a rebellion. [1]

Rep. Waters is on record blaming oil executives for the high cost of gasoline: "Guess what this liberal will be all about, this liberal will be all about socializing... taking over and the government running all of your companies." [Citation Needed]

Rep. Maxine Waters used her influence to help a bank in which her husband owned stock. The  House Ethics Committee  launched an investigation of her and whether she benefited as a result. [2]  After nearly three years of investigation, Rep. Waters was cleared of the charges. [3]

In 2005, 2006, 2009 and 2011, the group Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW) named Maxine Waters one of the 15 most corrupt members of Congress. [4]