Michael Rubens Bloomberg  (born February 14, 1942, in Boston, Massachusetts [1] ), an  elitist   New York City - liberal   gun grabbing  American  Democratic   billionaire   politician , is the founder and primary owner of Bloomberg, L.P., which licenses computer systems for real-time stock quotes to Wall Street and has news-related businesses. He served as mayor of  New York City  for three terms, 2002 to 2013. Even though he was a lifelong registered  Democrat , Michael Bloomberg successfully ran for mayor as a  Republican  in 2001 due in large part to the support of popular outgoing mayor  Rudy Giuliani , and was reelected in 2005.

He ran for a third term in 2009 as an independent, spending a record-breaking sum—the equivalent of $174.53 per vote (more than ten times his competitor). [2]   Michael Bloomberg is also one of the richest people in the world according to  Forbes  magazine, with an estimated net worth of $17 billion. [3]   Michael Bloomberg is divorced and has 2 children.

Bloomberg dropped his Republican Party affiliation on June 19, 2007, stating "I believe this brings my affiliation into alignment with how I have led and will continue to lead our city." [4]   Bloomberg is traditionally known as a fiscal  conservative  with social liberal tendencies. He was frequently mentioned as a possible independent candidate for the  2008 Presidential Election .

Michael Bloomberg holds a Bachelor of Arts & Science from Johns Hopkins University and a Master of Business Administration from Harvard University.  In 2001, Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism established the Bloomberg Chair in Journalism with a gift of $1.5 million from Bloomberg L.P. [5]

Bloomberg enforced a strengthened cell-phone ban in city schools. Under Mayor Bloomberg, the high school graduation rate in New York City went up 18%. He supports  abortion  rights and  same-sex "marriage" . Bloomberg was also the most prominent Republican to oppose President  George W. Bush 's nomination to the  U.S. Supreme Court  of Chief Justice  John Roberts .

Bloomberg is a supporter of  illegal immigration , saying that  New York City  would "collapse" if they didn't have illegally come aliens. [6]

Bloomberg took office as mayor in January 2002, just four months after the September 11th terrorist attacks. Upon taking office, he inherited the largest fiscal crisis in recent New York history. Giuliani spent lavishly during his final year in office, increasing capital spending by 60%. Not anticipating the  dot-com bubble  burst and the unforeseen attacks of September 11, Giuliani left office passing on a $4 billion city budget gap, where city law mandates a balanced budget. [7]  A large portion of New York City's budget are fixed costs. This created a predicament for the fiscally conservative new mayor. Bloomberg made some very unpopular budget cuts in the portions of the budget under his control, even closing many redundant fire-houses, a subject of severe public outcry so soon after September 11. These cuts however, had only marginal effect on the city's budget gap, which was ultimately addressed with the largest property tax increase in the city's history. Later in his second term, Bloomberg lowered property taxes, but not enough to completely remove the increases of his first term. Bloomberg effectively used tax breaks as an incentive to lure companies to the city. When Bloomberg first took office, the city's budget crisis brought threats from Albany that the state may step in and take over the city's finances. By June 2007 S&P (Standard and Poor's) raised New York City's bond rating to AA, the highest bond rating in the city's history. [8]

Bloomberg was criticized by  libertarians  for pushing for New York City's unprecedented ban on trans fats on restaurants.

Although he has remained mostly silent on foreign policy, Bloomberg was a supporter of the  War in Iraq . In March, 2007, during a news conference in Staten Island, he said about legislation proposed in Congress calling for a clear timetable for troop withdrawal, "we ask our young men and women to go over and to fight, and if you have a deadline knowing they're pulling out, how can you expect them to defend this country? How can you expect them to go out and put their lives at risk? I just think that's untenable and that this is not a responsible piece of legislation. It is totally separate of how we're conducting the war. It's totally separate of whether we should have been there. The issue that you asked about is plain and simple: Should the Congress pass a law forcing the president to withdraw troops at a given point in time? I think that is not something that is in the country's interest or in the military's interest."

Though Bloomberg suggested that he might run for President in 2008, he never did.

See main article:  Mayors Against Illegal Guns  and  American State Legislators for Gun Violence Prevention

Bloomberg has been criticized by the  NRA ,  Gun Owners of America ,  Second Amendment Foundation  and other  Second Amendment  advocates for his position on  handguns , having co-founded the  liberal   gun control   propaganda  organization, " Mayors Against Illegal Guns " ("MAIG"). His  gun control  policies and  executive orders  continued those implemented by his predecessor  Rudolph Giuliani .

New York City crime statistics for 2007 were the lowest ever recorded for the City. As of December 2007, compared to 2001 figures (the year before Bloomberg took office), shootings were down 11%, murder was down 25%, auto theft was down 55% and major crime overall was down 26%. [9]

Bloomberg, as a liberal elitist, strongly supports gun control and  gun free zones  and along with  Bill Gates  and  Steve Ballmer  far outspent the  NRA  to multimillion-dollar bankroll  Washington  State  Initiative 594 . [10]  (See  Northwest Firearms Forum ,  NRA on 594 ,  VoteNo594.com ) The newly passed law creates a new progressive  police state  bureaucracy with so-called " universal background checks " (except for criminals who never follow laws) and makes it a felony to temporarily loan a  gun  to a relative or friend even while you are at the  gun range  practicing together.