Willard Mitt Romney , most popularly known as  Mitt Romney , (born March 12, 1947) is the former governor of  Massachusetts , and a successful U.S. businessman, and was the  Republican nominee  for the  Presidential Election 2012 .  Romney lost against the incumbent  President Obama  in November 2012.

According to  CNN , Romney won by a margin of 67-25% the first presidential debate against  liberal  incumbent  Barack Obama .  This debate had the largest television audience for a presidential debate since  Ronald Reagan 's 1980 classic against  Jimmy Carter . [1]

He was first runner-up for the nomination in 2008. In 1994, Mitt Romney proved to be the most difficult challenger that incumbent Senator  Ted Kennedy  of Massachusetts ever faced for reelection, causing Kennedy to pour far more money into the race than he expected. [2]

Romney led Obama among many key segments of the electorate: "Romney leads  Obama  58%-34% among  veterans , who make up about 13% of the  electorate " and influence many other voters. [3]   50-43%, in early May. [4]  Other polls show different results, [5]  in swing states like Ohio, [6]  Virginia [7]  and Wisconsin. [8]   Most national polls showed Obama with a lead over Romney later in the summer, but that lead evaporated after Obama's weak performance in the first debate. One national poll showed Romney with a 7-point lead over  Obama .  Romney then lost the second and third debates by emphasizing  neocon  rather than  conservative  positions, and Obama improved in some polls.  By Election Day, however, the  Gallup  and  Rasmussen  polls showed Romney with a one-point lead.

Before entering politics Romney was a businessman in Boston, having served as CEO of  Bain Capital , a management consulting firm known for saving American companies. [9]  His political start began during the financially unsteady 2002 Winter Olympics. He gained popularity in Massachusetts, a state known for being extremely liberal, and was elected governor in 2002. As governor he raised taxes several times.  He unashamedly admits creating  RomneyCare , which is a complete disaster and forces everyone to buy health insurance and has resulted in long delays for obtaining medical services, such as an ordinary physical, in that state.   Ted Kennedy  and other  liberals  supported the bill and probably wrote key parts of it.  Romney declined to run for reelection and announced his candidacy for President.

During his campaign for the Republican nomination in 2008, Romney was widely but incorrectly supported as a staunch conservative and ran on his business experience in the private sector. Romney fought a rough battle against Senator  John McCain  in Florida, Michigan, and other key states, but large losses on the Super Tuesday primaries ended his campaign. Romney dropped out of the race and endorsed Senator  John McCain  on February 14, 2008. His name was circulated as a potential running mate for McCain as their relationship improved, though  Sarah Palin  eventually became the vice-president nominee.

Romney had supported many left positions: Romney had a pro-abortion record but has claimed to be pro-life since 2005; Romney acknowledges global warming but says that he doesn't know how much is due to human activity; Romney has been criticized for standing behind his 2005  health care plan in Massachusetts  whilst pledging to "replace" ObamaCare during his campaign for president in 2012. RomneyCare featured an 'individual mandate' requiring everyone to purchase health insurance, and unlike Obamacare, featured socialized medicine as a backup for those who could not afford to pay. This plan is very similar to the 2010 ObamaCare bill that was adopted on a national level, and Obama claims Romney's people helped craft it.

Romney is the scion of an old Mormon family. His grandparents were polygamists who fled the United States in the early 20th century when the Mormon Church repudiated polygamy; his father was born in Mexico. The Romneys returned to the U.S. in 1911 when a violent civil war broke out in Mexico.

Mitt Romney is a devout member of  The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints , and spent time as a missionary during his youth converting Catholics and agnostics to Mormonism in France. In fact, his time as a student and missionary helped him defer from military service during the Vietnam draft, [10]  but he stated during interviews that "he had longed to join the soldiers in Vietnam and support the war effort." His father had stated in 1967 that he felt "brainwashed" by U.S. officials over the justification of the prolonged Vietnam war. This statement had been very costly in George Romney's 1968 campaign for president against Richard Nixon.

Romney maintains a stable marriage with his wife Ann, with whom he has five children.

Romney is the son of former  Michigan  governor and presidential candidate  George Romney , a "Rockefeller Republican," [11]  who amassed a large fortune as an automobile industry magnate during World War II.  George Romney was popular among moderates during his presidential run and was well-equipped for victory; many of his political advisors had come from  Nelson Rockefeller 's 1964 campaign.

From 1978 to 1984, Romney was a vice president of Bain & Company, Inc. a worldwide management consulting firm, and in 1984, Romney co-founded a spin-off called Bain Capital. He invested in or bought many well-known companies such as Staples, Brookstone, Domino's, Sealy Corporation and Sports Authority.  Critics say he advised corporations to cut their U.S. taxes by reincorporating in Caribbean tax havens such as the Caymen Islands, while maintaining their operations in the U.S.

Romney served as governor of Massachusetts (2003-2007), with a generally  conservative  record that included economic expansion. He balanced the budget every year of his administration with out increasing taxes or increasing state dept. Romney turned a $3 billion budget deficit into a $500 million surplus by reducing government spending and added 80,000 new jobs by the end of his term. In 2004, 2005, and 2006 Governor Romney proposed cutting the state income tax from 5.3% to 5.0%. [12]  Although the Democratic super majority in the state legislator refused to budge. Romney vetoed 844 pieces of legislation, with over 700 overridden. [13]  He vetoed an increase in the minimum wage, saying "there's no question raising the minimum wage excessively causes a loss of jobs."  [14]  Under Governor Romney the state abolished a retroactive capital gains tax that would have forced nearly 50,000 taxpayers to pay additional taxes and fees. [15]  Massachusetts Citizens For Limited Taxation Executive Director Barbara Anderson praised Romney, saying "There was no one else out on the horizon and with the legislature almost entirely Democratic, we felt it was necessary to have a grown-up in the corner office. … And we were right to back him. He's been a really good friend to the taxpayers."

However, some of the actions Governor Romney took received criticisms from conservatives, such as supporting moderate fee increases and creating and the nation's first universal  health care  program. During his 2002 gubernatorial campaign Romney supported  abortion , his views evolved and would later take  pro-life  positions such as vetoing emergency contraception and vetoing  stem-cell research  that would allow cloning of human embryos. In 2006, Governor Romney testified before the  United States   Senate  to support the Federal Marriage Amendment, which would limit marriage to one man and one woman. Additionally, Romney filed legislation to reinstate  capital punishment , but was defeated in the Massachusetts House of Representatives on a 99-53 vote.

Mitt Romney made no pardons as governor, "My conclusion was, if somebody has been convicted by a jury of their peers, and they’ve been prosecuted and the police were able to get the evidence necessary to put them behind bars, why in the world would I step in and reverse that sentence?"  [16]

On  Education  Romney called for the privatization of the University of Massachusetts medical school. [17]  In 2004, he established the John and Abigail Adams Scholarship Program, which rewarded the top 25 percent of Massachusetts high school students with tuition-free scholarship to any Massachusetts public  university  or  college . In August 2006, Governor Romney refused to allow former Iranian President Mohammed Khatami, an outspoken opponent of the  United States  and  Israel , state police escorts during his speech at  Harvard University . [18]

In December 2006, Romney signed a memorandum of agreement with the federal government that would allow state troopers to enforce federal immigration laws, [19]  however was revoked when Democrat Deval Patrict took office as Governor in January 2007.

Currently, Romney claims to be pro-life, but his record is very spotty.  At times he has claimed to be pro-infantacide.
"I am  pro-life . I believe that  abortion  is the wrong choice except in cases of incest, rape, and to save the life of the mother. I wish the people of America agreed, and that the laws of our nation could reflect that view. But while the nation remains so divided over abortion, I believe that the states, through the democratic process, should determine their own abortion laws and not have them dictated by  judicial mandate ." ( Boston  Globe, Mitt Romney Editorial, July 26, 2005) 
 [20]

Despite having a largely pro-life record as governor, in a 1994 debate with Senator  Edward Kennedy , Romney said that abortion should be legal, declaring that "regardless of one's beliefs about choice, you would hope it would be safe and legal." "Many years ago, I had a dear, close family relative that was very close to me who passed away from an illegal abortion", Romney said. "It is since that time my mother and my family have been committed to the belief that we can believe as we want, but we will not force our beliefs on others on that matter. And you will not see me wavering on that." [21]

In his campaign literature for the 2002 Massachusetts gubernatorial election, Romney expressed a willingness to defend that State's pro-choice status quo. [22]  He stated in a live, televised debate: [23]

Romney claims to be opposed to the idea of  gay marriage , however he has voiced explicit support for the  homosexual agenda . He has advocated for domestic partnership benefits and equal rights for  homosexuals , which is gay marriage in everything but name and an easy stepping stone on the vile gay agenda path towards homosexual recruitment. [24]   He also supports adoption for gay couples. [25]

As President, Romney promised to pursue a conservative, pro-growth economic agenda. His number one economic priority would be to grow the economy — helping to create good jobs, raise incomes and preserve American strength. He says he would work to rein in excessive government spending and reform entitlements. To ensure America's continued economic growth, he promises to cut taxes — such as the Death Tax, savings taxes, corporate taxes and marginal tax rates. Despite these claims, he has supported the  socialism  agenda.  He claimed credit for the government bailout of the union controlled car companies. [26]  Also his  RomneyCare  law started the process of  socializing  medical care in  Massachusetts . He continues to defend this law up to this day, undermining his commitment to repel the similar and equally atrocious   ObamaCare . [27]

Romney says he would also promote trade, bring market forces to bear in health care, pursue national tort and liability reform, eliminate excessive regulations that put a burden on our economy and strengthen American families.

Romney supports a strong stance on illegal immigration. [29]  On 5/24/07, Romney spoke about how he was tolerant about gays and then he discussed the current illegal immigration bill before Congress:

"He has his view, and other people have their views and I have my own," Romney said. "This is for all intents and purposes a form of amnesty in that everyone who is here illegally today will be able to stay under this bill."

The bill is unfair to people who are trying to come to the country legally, he said. People here illegally should be able to apply to come to the United States, but under the same terms as everyone else and behind those who have already applied.

Mitt Romney supports the right of scientists to research on embryos created during fertility treatments. Critics consider this to be essentially infantacide. [31]

During the  Syrian Civil War , Romney called for arming various rebel groups. [32]  He also said that  Russia  is America's 'number one geopolitical foe'. [33]  Romney and  Paul Ryan  said that  China  is a cheater in global economy. [34]

Mitt Romney believes in  Evolution  as a part of  Creation  and he opposes  Intelligent Design . [35]

For a more detailed treatment, see  Mitt Romney 2008 Presidential Campaign .

As a presidential candidate Romney sought the support of the business community and social conservatives.  He reversed moderate positions on abortion and gay rights to take a hardline conservative position on them, and on opposition to illegal immigrants. Opponents charged he changed too often. Romney was a leader in fund-raising, augmented by over $35 million from his own fortune. However he was little known outside of Massachusetts, so his strategy was to play for early wins in Iowa and New Hampshire, then "sling-shot" the momentum into national visibility.  Romney won the Michigan primary on January 16, 2008, with 39% of the vote, edging out McCain with 30% and Huckabee with 16%.  Romney was favored to win in the state of his birth, where his father,  George Romney  was governor from 1963-1969.  After losing both the Iowa caucus and the New Hampshire primary (to Huckabee and McCain, respectively), Romney won a low-publicized Wyoming caucus. On January 19, Romney easily won the  Nevada  caucuses by 37 percentage points when there were seven candidates on the ballot, however, on that same day he placed a distant fourth in the  South Carolina  primary. After a disappointing performance on Super Tuesday, Romney announced the suspension of his campaign on Thursday 7 February.  He expressed his wishes not to divide the Republican party and later endorsed Senator  John McCain  of  Arizona . Commentators correctly speculated on his chances for a return effort in 2012.

Mitt Romney had done well in fund raising. During his first fund raiser as a presidential candidate, he raised $6.5 million compared to the claimed original goal of only $1 million. During the first quarter Romney raised more money then any other Republican presidential candidate with $23 million. However, a substantial portion of his funds ($17 million) came from his own personal wealth.  [1]

In April 2011, Romney announced his candidacy for President of the United States for the 2012 election, running as a Republican. [36]  Romney was criticized throughout the primary season for being a Republican In Name Only due to his liberal views on social issues as governor and his flip-flops, as well as a controversial business record. His main competitors during the primaries were former conservative Speaker of the House  Newt Gingrich , Pro-Life Senator  Rick Santorum , and libertarian Congressman  Ron Paul . Romney ended up winning the vast majority of contests, though the race remained close in delegate count throughout. Romney together with Vice Presidential candidate  Paul Ryan  are running against President Barack Obama and Vice President  Joe Biden  in an election to be held on November 6, 2012. During the campaign, Romney was criticized for saying that the  47% of Americans who do not pay income taxes consider themselves to be 'victims' .

Prior to his campaign for president in 2012, Romney had been criticized for flip-flopping on key social issues:

Romney was defeated in the election. It is speculated that Romney's inability to connect with core conservatives and his history of flip-flopping on many issues (only a few years before his first candidacy for President) cost him the election.

On January 9, 2015, Romney expressed interest in running for President in 2016.