The  New American Bible  (NAB) is the modern  Catholic  translation of the  Bible  for Americans. It was first published in 1970 and quickly replaced the  Confraternity Bible  as the most widely used by Catholic parishes.  It is one of two specifically Catholic translations in modern English which are in wide use today, the other being the  New Jerusalem Bible .   Some of the phrasing in the New American Bible is extraordinarily good, such as its rendition of Luke 9:62 ("No one who sets a hand to the plow and looks to what was left behind is fit for the kingdom of God") . [1]   This version is also one of the very few that wisely disparages the use of  hearsay  in translating Isaiah 11:3. [2]   But some other phrasing in the New American Bible is awkward or outdated.

It is based on the  Douay-Rheims  Bible and the  Confraternity Bible  but with more modern language, and some changes to the wording making it more "inclusive". The New American Bible was initially controversial and ultimately rejected by the Vatican because this translation replaced male-gendered human language with "gender-neutral" terms. This translation was subsequently revised as the  New American Bible, Revised Edition  (NABRE) in part to restore fidelity to the original ancient texts. [3]  The 1991 changes, in particular, are controversial because they replaced male-gendered human language with "gender-neutral" terms. Some traditional Catholics reject the New American Bible as a liberal translation and favor the use of the Douay-Rheims and Confraternity Bibles.

The NAB inconsistently translates the  Holy Spirit  as the gender-neutral "it" in one place (see Acts 8:16 [4] ), and "he" in another.  The NAB also downplays the existence of "hell", instead using substitutes unfamiliar to most people:

The NAB is also authorized by the  Episcopal Church in the United States  for worship and private devotion.

The New American Bible has a high percentage of outdated or awkward translations in key passages, including the following examples below.  Note that many of these are important passages:

"and when the dew evaporated, there on the surface of the desert were fine flakes like hoarfrost on the ground."

The one who bears the sore of leprosy shall keep his garments  rent  and his head bare, and shall  muffle  his beard; he shall cry out, 'Unclean, unclean!'

Compare the lack of clarity of that to the  ESV  translation : "The leprous person who has the disease shall wear torn clothes and let the hair of his head hang loose, and he shall cover his upper lip and cry out, 'Unclean, unclean.'"

When God saw by their actions how they turned from their evil way, he  repented  of the evil that he had threatened to do to them; he did not carry it out.

In those days, in that time, I will raise up for David  a just shoot  ...

Jesus said to them, "A prophet is  not without  honor except in his native place and among his own kin and in his own house.

The  NIV  and  New Jerusalem Bible  remove the compound negative and say it directly, as in the NIV version:

Jesus said to them, "Only in his hometown, among his relatives and in his own home is a prophet without honor.

"As they were coming down from the mountain, he charged them not to relate what they had seen to anyone, except when the Son of Man had risen from the dead." [6]

[The angel] said to them, "Do not be amazed!  You seek Jesus of Nazareth, the crucified.  He has been raised; he is not here.  Behold, the place where they had laid him."