Obamunism  is a portmanteau that was created by mixing together the words  Obam a  and  Comm unism ,
coined by critics of the  Obama administration  to describe  Barack Obama 's  socialistic  and " fascism  light" economic policies and the surveillance state ( Benito Mussolini  defined fascism as the wedding of state and corporate powers.  Accordingly, trend forecaster  Gerald Celente  labels  Obama's corporate bailouts  as being "fascism light" in nature). [1] [2]   Obamunism can also refer to Obama's  ruinous fiscal policies  and  reckless monetary policies  which have contributed to  high unemployment rates in the United States .

Wall Street  firms and banks that were bailed out were among Obama's biggest campaign supporters. [3]   Therefore, the Obama administration bailouts of corrupt, unproductive, and reckless Wall Street firms was hardly surprising, although it certainly was not helpful in making the United States economy more productive and prosperous. A 2005 study found that government corporate bailouts are often done for mere political considerations and the economic resources allocated exhibit significantly worse economic performance than resources that are invested using purely business considerations. [4]

The Obama administration has also been criticized for its  massive deficit spending  and  reckless monetary policy  via vast increases in the  money supply . [5] [6] [7]

Advocates of  free market   capitalism  were also opposed to President  George W. Bush , who signed legislation passed by the Democratic House and Senate totaling  over a trillion dollars in corporate bailouts in 2008. For example, the Treasury and Federal Reserve bailed out the leading banks and insurance companies in 2008 with hundreds of billions of dollars of guarantees of bad loans (called "toxic assets").

Trend forecaster  Gerald Celente  predicts that the corrupt economic policies of the Obama administration will lead to a second  great depression  that is global in scope (Celente predicted the 1987 US stock market crash, the dot.com crash, the US 2008/2009 recession, and the collapse of the USSR in the early 1990s) and "second  American Revolution " (Gerald Celente predicted the  tax protests  that are now occurring in America). [8] [9]   Celente also asserts that the costly and inefficient temporary short term methods that the Obama administration is using to alleviate economic problems in the short term (which are causing massive increases in deficit spending) is only making matters worse and will not prevent the worse economic depression in United States history from occurring. [10] [11]   In addition, Celente predicts that if a "second American Revolution" occurs in a peaceful and productive manner, it may include a  third party movement  of governance that will advocate a more  free market   capitalism  approach to the American economy and a more strict interpretation of the  United States constitution  as far as the authors'  original intent . [8] [9]

In an April 20, 2009 interview with  Russia Today , Gerald Celente stated concerning Barack Obama's economic policy:

In February 2010 the  Washington Times  reported:

In the 1970s, stagflation shocked traditional  Keynesian  economists, whose models said the economy could not suffer from both high unemployment and rapid inflation at the same time. Unfortunately, the Keynesians were wrong, because an economy obviously can experience both evils simultaneously...

It seems every week the Obama administration announces some new tax or mandate that will further handicap businesses. Regardless of the official definitions of recession, the economy will remain sluggish for years to come. But if the  Federal Reserve  continues with its reckless policies, Americans will experience high inflation on top of high unemployment. As in the late 1970s, Americans will see that the pundits are wrong, because stagflation is very real. [13]

President Obama made a decision to have the director of the U.S. Census Bureau work directly with the White House, a move in advance of the 2010 census that will determine redistricting of congressional seats.

The Census is used to redraw district lines for elected seats in Congress and state legislatures. Efforts were made by the  Clinton administration  after the 2000 Census to adjust the totals for states and cities using statistical sampling and computer models. In 1999, the  U.S. Supreme Court  ruled 5-4 in  Department of Commerce v. U.S. House  that sampling could not be used to reapportion congressional seats. But it left open the possibility that sampling could be used to redraw political boundaries within the states.

Not only is it the basis for congressional redistricting, it provides the raw data by which government spending is allocated on everything from roads to schools. The Bureau of Labor Statistics also uses the Census to prepare the economic data that so much of business relies upon.

Rep. Darrell Issa of  California  and Rep. Patrick McHenry of  North Carolina  on the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, addressed President Obama: 
"Requiring the Census director to report directly to White House Chief of Staff  Rahm Emanuel  is a shamefully transparent attempt by your administration to politicize the Census Bureau and manipulate the 2010 Census. The constitutionally-mandated decennial Census needs to be fair, accurate and trusted. By circumventing the secretary of commerce's oversight of the Census Bureau and handing it directly to a political operative such as Mr. Emanuel, you are severely jeopardizing the fairness and accuracy of the 2010 Census."  [14]   Issa also stated, "Any attempt by the  Obama administration  to circumvent the census process for their political benefit will be met with fierce opposition. This ill-conceived proposal undermines a constitutionally obligated process that speaks to the very heart of our  democracy ."

Michael Barone of  US News and World Report  noted the White House power grab may violate the  Constitution . [15]  Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution provides for an "actual enumeration" and a statute passed by Congress provides that the duties under this clause are to be performed by the secretary of commerce. Article  is about the legislative, not the executive branch. Hence, the president can't substitute a sampling for the enumeration required to be done by the secretary.

Bruce Chapman, director of the U.S. Census Bureau under  President Ronald Reagan , explains

The Tower Commission Report on the  Iran/Contra  fiasco during the  Reagan Administration  reviewed what was wrong  [17]  in the National Security process and made specific recommendations to avoid future potential abuses of power. The report stated the NSC staff had "developed an important role within the Executive Branch of coordinating policy review, preparing issues for presidential decision, and monitoring implementation. For this reason it has generally operated out of public view and has not been subject to direct oversight by Congress." [18]   In  Iran/Contra , the "NSC staff assumed direct operational control," [19]  and "Congress was never notified." [20]

As specific recommendations, the Commission declared "Departments and agencies should not be excluded from participation in the process. The staff should not be implementors or operators;" [21]  when the NSC staff "take on implementation responsibilities, they risk compromising their objectivity. They can no longer act as impartial overseers of the implementation, ensuring that Presidential guidance is followed, that policies are kept under review, and that the results are serving the President's policy and the national interest." [22]   The Commission also noted, "Circumventing the departments...robs the President of the experience and capacity resident in the departments...Process will not always produce brilliant ideas, but history suggests it at least can prevent bad ideas from becoming presidential policy." [23]

In August 2009 it was revealed the  Obama administration  ignored the Tower Commission Report. In a profanity-laced screaming match at the  White House [24]   CIA  Director  Leon Panetta  protested Obama's decision to create a team of interrogators overseen by the White House. [25]  Responsibility for interrogations of suspects was shifted away from the CIA and the National Security Council staff given direct operational control. [26]   Independent Counsel for  Iran/Contra  Lawrence Walsh wrote in the Final Report, "The National Security Act of 1947, the statute that created the NSC, 48  charges it to 'assess and appraise the objectives, commitments, and risks of the United States in relation to our actual and potential military power, in the interest of national security," whereas the CIA, created by the same statute as an "agency involved in intelligence activities -- 'under the National Security Council,' and assigns the CIA the responsibility of 'coordinating the intelligence activities of the several Government departments and agencies in the interest of national security . . . under the direction of the National Security Council. 50 "  [27]  The  Obama administration  has said the new arrangements will be involved in "intelligence gathering." [28]

Critics such as former National Security Adviser Richard Allen said, "The National Security Council staff doesn't have, in my view, the expertise to be in the interrogation business" and puts the White House "in a position of micro-managing the process."  Tony Shaffer, a former Army intelligence observed, "Once you have direct knowledge of day-to-day activities coming into a central location near or at the  White House , there's a tendency, almost a temptation, to meddle in actual field activities, such as  LBJ  calling in to commanders in rice paddies in  Vietnam  what he wants to have done that day." [28]

Unlike executive departments and agencies such as the  Department of Justice ,  FBI , and CIA, the  National Security Council staff is not subject to Congressional authority and oversight, and operate outside the spotlight of public view. [29] [30]  The  American Civil Liberties Union  made this point during the  elections of 2008  when the George W. Bush  NSC  staff was involved only in decisions and authorizations and before the Obama NSC staff took on an operational role. [31]

John Brennan , who was Obama's first choice as CIA Director, had his nomination withdrawn over allegations he was involved in enhanced interrogations of terror suspects during the administration of President  George W. Bush . [32] 
 [33]   As Obama's adviser on counter-terrorism, Brennan was placed in charge of the operation.

Obama has called for a domestic "Civilian National Security Force" to be "just as powerful, just as strong, just as well-funded" as the United States military. ( Video ) [34]   By contrast, the  U.S. Army  alone has nearly 500,000 troops, not counting reserves or  National Guard . In 2007, the  U.S. Defense  budget was $439 billion. [35]

Rep. Bob Filner, a  Democrat  from  California  introduced H.R. 675, a  backdoor spending  bill that would amend title 10 of the United States Code and extend to civilian employees of the Department of Defense the authority to execute warrants, make arrests, and carry firearms. The bill would amend the U.S. code with the following: “Sec. 1585b. Law enforcement officers of the Department of Defense: authority to execute warrants, make arrests, and carry firearms… for any offense against the United States.” The bill would define a “law enforcement officer of the Department of Defense” as “a civilian employee of the Department of Defense,” including federal police officers, detectives, criminal investigators, special agents, and game law enforcement officers classified by the Office of Personnel Management Occupational Series 0083. The United States Office of Personnel Management is described as an “independent agency” of the U.S. government that manages the civil service of the federal government.

The  Department of Defense  has issued Defense Directive 1404.10 ( read  PDF ) that establishes a “DoD Civilian Expeditionary Workforce.”  The Obama administration describes the Civilian Expeditionary Workforce as follows:

Both H.R. 675 and the DoD Civilian Expeditionary Workforce directive will establish civilian “soft power” under the direction of the Pentagon. Alex Jones'  Infowars .com site states, "Obama is now actively working to create a paramilitary 'civilian national security force that’s just as powerful, just as strong, just as well-funded' as the military. In order to skirt Posse Comitatus, Obama’s paramilitary  brownshirts  will be organized and run out of the Office of Personnel Management with orders coming from the Pentagon." [36]

Some critics have expressed concern over President Obama's intentions. [37]

By act of Congress and the signature of President Obama, the eighth anniversary of the  September 11, 2001 terror attacks  marked the first officially designated Patriot Day, a National Day of Service. The concept was championed by MyGoodDeed, an organization founded by family and friends of people killed in the attacks. The group's mission statement calls for honoring "the victims of 9/11 and those who rose to service in response to the attacks by encouraging" good deeds and various volunteer activities. A  New York Post  editorial alerted to the danger how

The  Obama administration  supports creating clean energy jobs in cities through a campaign called  Green the Block , started by the groups Green For All and the Hip Hop Caucus. A video and statement are posted on the White House blog. Environmental Czar  Van Jones , founder of Green for All, said 9/11 commemoration would be an opportunity to "connect, to find other people in your peer group who are also passionate about repowering America but also greening up America and cleaning up America." In 2004 Jones on behalf of his organization, the Ella Baker Center for Human Rights, signed on to the  conspiratorial  911 Truth organization  [39]  alleging a U.S. role in planning and executing the attacks. [40]

barackobama.com, which now is "Organizing for America, the successor organization to Obama for America," [41]  carries an event described as follows:

What day? Our US Senators return to DC the Tues after Labor Day. That next FRIDAY, Sep 11, is Patriot Day, designated in memory of the nearly three thousand who died in the 9/11 attacks. 
All 50 States are coordinating in this – as we fight back against our own Right-Wing Domestic Terrorists who are subverting the American Democratic Process, whipped to a frenzy by their Fox Propaganda Network ceaselessly re-seizing power for their treacherous leaders....

One week prior to the first Patriot Day and Green the Block action, President Obama's aides acknowledge the White House helped the  U.S. Education Department  craft a proposal for prekindergarten to sixth-grade students to write letters about "what they can do to help the president," and for students immediately after listening to a speech by the president to engage in a  discussion about what "the president wants us to do." A curriculum was distributed nationwide by the Department of Education prior to Obama's presentation to students. [43]  Part of the exercise was to include teachers putting up “quotations” from Obama on the walls, and having the children making a “pledge” to do what they can to “serve” President Obama. [44]

President Obama rose to prominence as the Keynote speaker at the 2004 Democratic National Convention declaring in the speech,

President Obama told the corrupt, scandal ridden  ACORN  organization, an organization involved in human trafficking, the teenage sex trade, and ballot box stuffing initiatives on behalf of Democratic candidates, [46]

Before suffering a resounding rebuke of his leadership, [48]  his party, and the progressive liberal  ideology  in the  2010 midterm elections , Mr. Obama urged partisan backers to exact revenge on their 'enemies'. [49] [50] [51] [52]  The president suggested,

In March 2009 the  Obama administration  announced it would send $50 million to the United Nations Population Fund, or UNFPA. UNPFA actively promotes abortion and is working closely with Chinese population control officials to implement China's forced abortion policy.  The  CCP 's  coercive one-child rule has resulted in forced abortions, involuntary sterilizations and other  human rights  abuses. [53]

UNFPA officials work side-by-side their Chinese colleagues and even share the same offices. [54]

In July  2009 the  White House  began soliciting from its immense social media networks and the general public  that if they were to "see something on the web about  health insurance reform  that seems fishy, send it to flag@whitehouse.gov." [55] [56] 
Under the  Privacy Act of 1974 , which was passed after the  Nixon administration  used federal agencies to illegally investigate individuals for  political  purposes, prohibits any federal agency from maintaining records on individuals exercising their right to  free speech . [57] [58]

Sen.  John Cornyn  of Texas stated in a letter to the White House, "I am not aware of any precedent for a President asking American citizens to report their fellow citizens to the White House for pure political speech that is deemed ‘fishy' or otherwise inimical to the White House's political interests." [59] 
Congressman Darrell Issa also expressed grave concern about the administration blurring the lines between political and official business by collecting data on administration critics. [60]

In August 2009 it was reported the White House was soliciting bids to outsource a technology vendor to conduct a massive, secret effort to harvest personal information on millions of Americans from social networking websites of Facebook, Twitter, MySpace, YouTube, Flickr and others – any space where the White House “maintains a presence.” The information to be captured includes comments, tag lines, emails, audio, and video.

Critics have charged the emerging pattern of information management and control as "yet another sign that this Administration is at best indifferent to privacy rights and at worst prepared to violate  civil liberties  for  political  purposes. [61]

The Obama  Justice Department  has been accused of being "secretive, tyrannical, and oppressive" and compared with  President George W. Bush , "even worse." [62]   As a candidate, Senator Obama lamented that the Bush Administration "invoked a legal tool known as the 'state secrets' privilege more than any other previous administration to get cases thrown out of civil court," however in a motion to dismiss  Jewel v. NSA , the Electronic Frontier Foundation litigation against the National Security Agency for the warrantless wiretapping, the  Obama Administration  argued that the state secrets privilege requires the court to dismiss the issue out of hand. The Obama administration argued that simply allowing the case to continue "would cause exceptionally grave harm to national security." As in the past, this is a blatant ploy to dismiss the litigation without allowing the courts to consider the evidence.

The Obama Justice Department then argued that the U.S. Government is completely immune from litigation for illegal spying — that the Government can never be sued for surveillance that violates federal privacy statutes. Birch Bricker writing in the  Auburn Journal  then points out, "This is a radical assertion that is utterly unprecedented. No one — not the  White House , not the Justice Department, not any member of Congress, and not the  Bush Administration  — has ever interpreted the law this way....The Obama Administration goes two steps further than Bush did, and claims that the  US PATRIOT Act  also renders the U.S. immune from suit under the two remaining key federal surveillance laws: the Wiretap Act and the Stored Communications Act. Essentially, the Obama Administration has claimed that the government cannot be held accountable for illegal surveillance under any federal statutes."  [63]

As the Democratic candidate for president Obama pledged on numerous occasions to countless audiences closing the  Guantanamo Bay  Detention facility housing uncharged captured combatants in order to "regain America's moral stature in the world."  [64]   After assuming office, Obama made a budget request to transfer the detainees to the  United States  without specifying where the detainees would be held.  The Democratic-controlled Congress repudiated Obama by denying funding for that transfer, and leaders from both parties spoke against it. [65]  Obama then endorsed indefinite detention without trial. [66]

Obama has continued covert operations in  Iran  begun under President  George W. Bush . Investigative journalist  Seymour Hersh  quotes numerous sources as saying that the  U.S. Congress  agreed to a Bush request in late 2007 to fund an escalation of covert operation in Iran. Hersh says those operations began as early as 2005.  Bush signed a series of executive orders and findings [in late 2004] permitting the Pentagon to run clandestine, covert operations—operations which Americans go into countries under cover. [67]   Jeremy R. Hammond writes in the  progressive  website  Foreign Policy Journal : "[G]iven the record of U.S. interference in the state affairs of Iran and clear policy of regime change, it certainly seems possible, even likely, that the U.S. had a significant role to play in helping to bring about the recent turmoil in an effort to undermine the government of the Islamic Republic.

According to Ken Timmerman, the executive director of the Foundation for Democracy in Iran ~ the Persian Service of  Voice of America  (VOA) clearly sided with Mir Hossein Mousavi against those dissident groups who wanted to boycott the election entirely, the position Timmerman favored. Timmerman saw the branding of Mousavi's "green revolution" as evidence that the US government was using its National Endowment for Democracy to support the former prime minister Mousavi.  Post election violence claimed the lives of 69 people. [68]  Steve Weissman writes,
"[O]ur opposition to [  Ahmadinejad  ] does not justify meddling in another country's election while proclaiming "universal democratic values." [69]

Eric Margolis, a columnist for Quebecor Media Company in Canada and a contributor to  The Huffington Post , wrote:  "While the majority of protests we see in Tehran are genuine and spontaneous, Western intelligence agencies and media are playing a key role in sustaining the uprising and providing communications, including the newest electronic method, via  Twitter . These are covert techniques developed by the US during recent revolutions in Ukraine and Georgia that brought pro-US governments to power."

On Secretary of State  Hillary Clinton 's first official visit to  China , the Secretary told Chinese leaders the  Obama administration  considered  human rights  concerns secondary to economic survival [70]  and asked the  CCP  leaders for help financing  President Obama 's massive $787 economic stimulus plan by buying US Treasury securities. [71]

The  Dalai Lama , often portrayed as a religious leader, was made  Tibetan  head of state in 1950, the same year that China invaded and annexed Tibet. [72]   CNN  reports the Chinese find it "unacceptable when they see the Dalai Lama treated as a VIP, or even akin to a head of state." [72]

After the Dalai Lama met with President Obama in February, 2010 he was unceremoniously escorted through a side door that trash is regularly carried out to a photo op with awaiting camaras.

Prof. Chai Feldblum, a Georgetown University law professor nominated by President Barack Hussein Obama to serve on the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, has declared society should “come down on the side” of homosexual equality at the expense of religious liberty. Feldblum reasoned the conflict between the two is “irreconcilable,” religious liberty—also called "belief liberty"—must be placed second to the “identity liberty” of homosexuals.

Feldblum published her beliefs in an article entitled “Moral Conflict and Liberty: Gay Rights and Religion” in the Brooklyn Law Review in 2006.  Feldblum recognizes that elements of the  homosexual agenda  may infringe on Americans’ religious liberties. “Protecting one group’s identity liberty may, at times, require that we burden others’ belief liberty. This is an inherent and irreconcilable reality of our complex society,” Feldblum wrote. [73]

In May 2009  bibles  were burned at Bagram Air Base in  Afghanistan . [74] [75]

The Cybersecurity Act of 2009 would give the administration authority to conduct warrant-less spying and dictatorial power over Internet. [76]

Rod Beckstrom, formerly in charge of coordinating the US government’s cyber-security operations, in a resignation letter to Secretary of Homeland Security  Janet Napolitano , [77]  cited the expanded control over the nation’s computer security efforts poses “threats to our democratic processes.”  [78]

General Resources:

Articles on Obama administration monetary policy :

2009 Obama Administration Monetary Policy Videos :

2008 Obama Administration Monetary Policy Videos

2009 Articles on Obama administration fiscal policy:

2009 Videos on Obama administration fiscal policy: