The  Oxford Union Society , better known as the  Oxford Union , is a prestigious private debating society in the city of  Oxford ,  United Kingdom . Its membership is drawn almost entirely from the  University of Oxford , although undergraduates at  Oxford Brookes University  are also permitted to join. [1]  Past presidents of the Oxford Union include many prominent British and foreign political figures, including former  Prime Ministers   William Gladstone ,  Harold Macmillan ,  Herbert Asquith  and  Edward Heath ; assassinated  Pakistani  leader  Benazir Bhutto ; and current Members of  Parliament  such as  William Hague  and  Boris Johnson .

The Union hosts regular public debates, which often feature guest speakers drawn from the worlds of  politics , academia, the media and the military. Any member can attend the debates. At the end of debates, it is customary to vote by "dividing the House"; members leave through two separate doors, the right hand being marked "Ayes" and the left "Noes". This is the same style of voting used in the British  Parliament .

Union members also participate in international competitive debating. The Oxford IV is a well-known debating contest hosted by the Union; last term the Union Treasurer, Krishna Omkar, served as co-convenor of the IV. [2]

In 2007, it was announced that the Union had invited controversial speakers  Nick Griffin , leader of the far-right British National Party, and  David Irving , a historian known for his polemical views about the  Holocaust , to speak in a forum on  freedom of speech . This attracted considerable controversy, with the president of the Oxford University Student Union [3]  and various  left-wing  student organisations, such as Unite Against Fascism, [4]  condemning the invitation. Within the Union, a poll of Union members was conducted on the issue, with members voting overwhelmingly in favour of the invitations. [5]  On the day of the debate (26 November 2007), protestors travelled from all over the country to participate in riots against the guest speakers; the demonstrators at one point breached the security cordon and broke into the main debating chamber. [6] [7] [8]