Paul Jennings Hill  (born in February 6, 1954) was a radical pro-life activist. He was  executed  in  Florida  for fatally shooting an  abortion  practitioner named Dr.  John Britton , a abortion provider, on July 29, 1994 in Pensacola, Florida. [1]  He was executed on September 3, 2003 under the governance of Jeb Bush.

The majority of the  pro-life  movement condemns him. A few do support him such citing him to be a  Dietrich Bonhoeffer  among these is Rev.  Michael Bray  and  David Miller . The climax of the controversy was at his execution when dozens of death penalty protesters and radical antiabortionists protested together. The sky actually became darkened and began to thunder shortly before his funerals which many radical anti-abortionist cited as the wrath of  God  for his execution. Among the movement to stop his execution was John Briton's step daughter who said such violence solves nothing.This is the last words of Paul Hill:"The last thing I want to say: If you believe abortion is a lethal force, you should oppose the force and do what you have to do to stop it. May God help you to protect the unborn as you would want to be protected." [2]

As a teenager Paul Hill was part of the counter-culture he was arrested by the police for drug charges by a warrant signed by his own father. He underwent treatment for drugs soon after that. He continued living a wild lifestyle until he met a stranger who told him to accept the Lord though he fought nothing of it then he later accepted the Lord that night. He stopped doing drugs immediately after his conversion. He later attended  a  Christian   liberal arts college  where he read the  Bible  at four a.m. two or three hours each day. He mingled well with his non-Christian friends just as well as he did before. He later joined Reformed Theological Seminary and subsequently became a preacher of two churches. He accepted a belief in Theonamy—the belief that God's law supersedes government laws. He was inspired by Michael Griffin, the first protester to kill an abortion doctor. He soon was removed from the ministry for his radical personal beliefs. A year later he shot the abortion doctor. [2] [3]  In jail he continued to be involved with radical antiabortionists and wrote a book entitled "Mix my Blood with the Unborn". [4]