Philip Pullman  is an anti- Christian  novelist. He has made public statements and written fictional works for children and young adults which were - admittedly - designed "to undermine the basis of Christian belief."

Philip Pullman was born in Norwich,  England , in 1946, to Audrey and Alfred Pullman. The early years of Pullman's life were spent travelling because his father was a member of  Britain 's  Royal Air Force  (RAF). His father died when he was age 7, and his family then travelled to  London  to find work. A year later, Pullman's mother remarried to another man working for the RAF. His family lived in  Australia  for much of those next two years. When Pullman was ten years old, his stepfather quit his job at the RAF to help his growing family. In 1965, Pullman won a scholarship to attend  Exeter College  in  Oxford . He did so for four years. [1]  At the age of 25, Pullman became a teacher at a middle school also in Oxford. From 1986 to 1994, he taught at Westminster College. Pullman wrote his first book  Count Karlstein  in 1982. [2]  Today, Pullman lives in Oxford with his wife Jude. Pullman is a father to two grown children and has two grandchildren. [3]

Novels aimed at children and young adults include the  atheistic   His Dark Materials  and  Sally Lockhart  series. His works have come under criticism for their subversively anti-religious nature. His books portray God as an evil being who ruled the world through the  Magisterium , an  Inquisition -like institution which commits various heinous acts.

Philip Pullman has written almost 20 books. These include:

Philip Pullman has been the recipient of many awards: [4]

Frank Furedi wrote:

... He is adept at public moralising. He has denounced  Narnia  as "morally loathsome," describing  C.S. Lewis ’s series of books as amongst the "most ugly and poisonous things" he has read. Indeed, Pullman directly counterpoises his "non-Christian" trilogy to the "Christian" Narnia. [5]

Blogger Joe Levi charged:

Pullman is a  militant   atheist  and  secular humanist  (who describes himself as both an  agnostic  and an atheist). He has said, "I don’t profess any  religion ; I don’t think it’s possible that there is a  God ; I have the greatest difficulty in understanding what is meant by the words 'spiritual' or ' spirituality '" and despises  C. S. Lewis  and the  Chronicles of Narnia . His motivation for writing this trilogy was specifically to counteract Lewis's symbolism of  Christ  that are portrayed in the Narnia series. [6]

Peter Hitchens calls Pullman:

Most of criticism of Pullman is based solely on the controversial  His Dark Materials  series, for which he became famous, in particular the killing of  Yahweh , the Judeo-Christian God as the climax of the novels.

Pullman is quoted as saying:

"The highest virtue, we have on the authority of the New Testament itself, is love, and yet you find not a trace of that in the books," he said.

Considering the entire set of books is an allegory of Jesus' love, this statement is especially odd.  There is a great deal of love among family members, love of country, and sacrificing to do the right thing.  Indeed, it would be hard to read more than a few pages without coming across a strong concept of love.  The comment has little to do with the works he is discussing.