Pietism  has roots in late 17th century German  Lutheranism  following the  Protestant Reformation . The ongoing theological disputes that were dividing  Christianity  into competing factions prompted some Christians to emphasize the need for a heart-felt, less intellectually oriented (less " scholastic ")  faith . In this atmosphere, Pietism was born.

The emerging theological tradition of the  Pietist movement  was articulated in 1675 in a key  treatise  entitled  Pia Desideria  ("Pious Desires"), written by  Philipp Jakob Spener . This treatise calls on Christians to live out the implications of Luther's reformation faith, advocating a living faith of deep personal feeling which Spener and his fellow Pietists felt was absent in most Protestant churches.

The Pietists emphasize:

Pietists' concerns are similar to those of sixteenth-century  Anabaptism , which also claimed the Protestant Reformation had not reformed the church as thoroughly as it needed to be reformed, but Pietism was malleable enough to be combined with other theological traditions besides Anabaptism. Jakob Spener, himself a Lutheran minister, believed his emphases meshed well with Lutheran theology. The English  Puritans  combined Pietist emphases with their  Calvinist  theology. Another Englishman,  John Wesley , incorporated Pietist emphases into the eighteenth-century  Methodist  movement (see  Wesleyanism ).

The  Brethren in Christ Church  has its roots in the Pietist tradition. The denomination's founders were Lancaster County  Mennonites  who, around 1775, responded enthusiastically to  itinerant preachers who were preaching a Pietist message . In that way, the beginnings of the Brethren in Christ Church can be seen as a marriage of Anabaptism and Pietism.

Almost all of the various  Brethren  assemblies and churches formed since the 18th century follow a Pietist theology.

Pietism discourages involvement in the public arena of civic and political action and reform, emphasizing that one's faith is to be kept solely a  personal  and  private  matter, unstained and apart from the concerns of the world, setting " your affection on things above, not on things on the earth. " ( Colossians 3:2 ) This is also the primary emphasis of the current  liberal  and  atheistic  American political view of the place of religion in the United States.

Assemblies of God

Charismatic movement

Church of the Brethren

Churches of Christ

Church of the Nazarene

Holiness Movement

Pentacostalism

Plymouth Brethren

Elitism

Philipp Jakob Spener (Britannica.com)

Pietism. James D. Nelson, Mark A. Noll (mb-soft.com)

Pietism (messiah.edu)

A Brief History on Pietism and Statist Rulers: Why Rulers Promote a Pietistic Form of Christianity, Pastor Matt Trewhella (mercyseat.net)

How Pietism Deceives Christians: Errors of Elitist Teachings in the Church, by Bob DeWaay (cicministry.org)