Quantitative Easing  is the controversial technique used by a nation's central bank to shift a portion its portfolio of  assets  from overnight and short term  loans  to holding more long-term bonds.  Ordinarily, a central bank increases the money supply by lowering short-term interest rates.  When the bank lowers the rate to zero percent interest, a different step must be taken to further increase the short term money supply.

It is an economic  monetary policy  in which the total  money supply  is increased by the central bank buying long-term bonds.  In the United States, the  Federal Reserve  buys Treasury bonds. The goal is to encourage private  bank  to lend more and help reduce the effects of an economic recession and avoid deflation. Quantitative easing was first used by  Japan  in 2000 to fight a  deflationary  economy. A side-effect of quantitative easing is that the currency becomes devalued versus other  currencies , which affects international trade. For this reason, the central banks of economically developed countries try to use quantitative easing in cooperation with other nations.

This policy of creating additional money to give to banks so that they lend more is highly questionable. The banks were largely responsible for the  Great Recession  and the increased money for banks have failed to produce the desired effect even after the Central Bank's $1.7 trillion purchase. The short term economic gains are minimal and in the long term, the central bank will lose money if the market value of the bonds drop before the bank can sell them.  If a quantitative easing policy is in place too long, it can eventually lead to higher prices and inflation or even hyper-inflation. [1]

For example, in response to a weakening  economy , the Federal Reserve announced on September 13, 2012 that: [2]

But this time, the Fed has promised that "if the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially," it won't stop buying and could ramp up its spending further .

In general, the Federal Reserve tries to stimulate the economy by lowering short-term interest rates.  However, when short-term interest rates are lowered to zero, the Federal Reserve turns to other less frequently used actions to with a goal of stimulating the economy. The Federal Reserve calls these "quantitative easing."  Basically, these involve the Federal Reserve purchasing longer-term bonds to lower the medium and long-term interest rates.

There is no free lunch, so "quantitative easing" is always at someone's expense.  In general, although the some individuals in the economy may benefit from quantitative easing, the people who rely on bond interest income are harmed by their reduced income. On the whole, however, quantitative easing harms the economy as it reduces predictability.  Instead of the market determining the value and quantity of money, it is the determined by the caprice of the Federal Reserve Board who may act in a very unwise manner unconstrained by market forces and guided by antiquated economic liberal theories such as  Keynesian economics . In addition, quantitative easing is not equitable in its policy and unjustly enriches the wealthier members of society. [3]  For example, the elderly who wish to receive income from low risk bonds and  bank deposits  are hurt by arbitrary and artificial measures to lower interest rates dictated by unelected  elitist  bankers rather than market forces. [4]

Michael Snyder wrote concerning  Ben Bernanke  who was chairman of the Federal Reserve at the time:

In 2012, hedge fund manager Mark Spitznagel argues in the  Wall Street Journal :

The Fed doesn’t expand the money supply by uniformly dropping cash from helicopters over the hapless masses. Rather, it directs capital transfers to the largest banks (whether by overpaying them for their financial assets or by lending to them on the cheap), minimizes their borrowing costs, and lowers their reserve requirements. All of these actions result in immediate handouts to the financial elite first, with the hope that they will subsequently unleash this fresh capital onto the unsuspecting markets, raising demand and prices wherever they do.” [6]

In May 2012, Chris Ferreira wrote:

If, however, central banks intervene in the market to suppress interest rates to pump an artificial stimulus into the markets, this provides the illusion to entrepreneurs that there is real excess savings in banks that would supposedly account for a longer term vision and increase of demand for capital goods.

This is a fallacy. Entrepreneurs in this scenario are led into making malinvestments, for when the suppressed interest rates are allowed to increase to their normal levels, the malinvestments fail. The longer the suppression of interest rates, the more malinvestments are created and the more systemic damage it will create in any given economy when interest rates return to normal (and corrections are inevitable).

Construction and real estate are two of the main beneficiaries of capital good investments when interest rates are low. The inverse applies for high interest rates, as more capital is spent on a shorter-term vision on consumer goods and away from capital goods. [7]