Inspiration for The Question Evolution Project (a.k.a. TQEP) began with the  grassroots "Question Evolution" campaign  from Creation Ministries International. There was also a  video by   "PPSimmons"  regarding "Question Evolution". The author ("Cowboy Bob" Sorensen) suggested in a comment to CMI that a coordinated effort for a "Question Evolution Day" would be effective. The comment was published on their site, but nothing more was said. His "text video" was included on  CMI's "15 Questions for Evolutionists" page .  Note:  Neither "The Question Evolution Project" nor "Question Evolution Day" have been a product of Creation Ministries International, nor are any CMI employees affiliated with these activities.

Cowboy Bob Sorensen decided to attempt coordinating the first "Question Evolution Day" himself, in 2012. Although he is a biblical creationist, the main thrust of that particular project was not intended to be theological. It was simply to encourage people to speak out on February 12, saying that the scientific evidence does  not  support evolution. Rather, the evidence points to a Creator. People should be able to have the intellectual, professional and academic freedoms to express their views without fear of retaliation, censorship, censure and ridicule.

In January 2012, Mr. Sorensen began contacting bloggers, individuals and organizations to support the project. A Facebook "Page" was also added, and a  video was made . For a beginning effort, "Question Evolution Day" was moderately successful, even attracting attention in  The Christian Post  and from vituperative atheists. "Question Evolution Day" was featured, and will be featured annually on February 12, on  "Evolutionary Truth by Piltdown Superman" .

To emphasize that the project is ongoing and not limited to one day a year, the name was changed to "The Question Evolution  Project ". The sub-project of "Question Evolution Day" is still emphasized, but the Piltdown Superman site has always been intended to be a resource for seekers of information on origins. It has links to biblical creationist sites for those interested in further research and for homeschoolers. While the Facebook Page mirrors the material at Piltdown Superman, other material is posted there exclusively.

TQEP has been growing  on Facebook . Several Administrators bring a variety of interesting items to share, and  creation science "memes"  have been quite popular. Recently, TQEP added a  page on Google+ .

From the "Mission" section: 
Evolutionism dominates the media, education and so on. Pages like this  are  "equal time" to present information that is ignored and often suppressed. We attempt to help raise awareness that true science is not afraid to examine contrary evidence and allows alternative theories to the interpretation of the evidence (such as creation science). Specifically, evolutionists should not have the right to shout down, censor, censure or intimidate creationists / ID proponents. You are encouraged to investigate and get involved.