Religions around the world all have stances on abortion. From Christianity to Islam to smaller, more local faiths, abortion is a popular and widely discussed topic, both accepted and condemned. In our modern age, the acceptance of abortion is growing more and more prevalent, flying in the face of many of the religions listed below. It is important for anyone planning to undergo or assist this practice to note their faith values first before deciding to do so.

The  Catholic Church  has always opposed  abortion . It considers the practice to be a grave sin which leads to eternal separation from God in all its forms, even in the case of a rape or incest. Prominent leaders of the church have been vocal on the practice, including  Pope Francis , who sympathized with its "innocent victims."  [1]

Aiding abortion causes automatic  excommunication  from the Catholic Church, although in the  Year of Mercy  there is a special opportunity for forgiveness and reconciliation.

Eastern Orthodoxy, in line with Catholicism, opposes abortion. It considers it to be an unspeakable evil.

As Protestantism is a very divided branch of Christianity, there are many different views. The United Church of Christ and Unitarian Universalism(Two heresies in the name itself. How subtil.) accept it completely, while the United Methodist Church and the Presbyterian Church USA support oppose only late-term or partial birth abortion. [2] , while the Mormons and Episcopals have rape or incest clauses  [3]   However, most evangelical Protestants and baptists cling to the commandment, "Thou shall not kill" and have very strict guidelines on the practice.

Buddhism is generally mixed on abortion. Many oppose it, yet it is common among Japanese Buddhists.

Hinduism  opposes abortion except when the life of the mother is at risk.

Jainism  opposes abortion 100%.

There are differing opinions, yet there is a general consensus that it is inexplicably wrong after four months, where the fetus gains a soul.

In conclusion, it is to be remembered that most religions are against abortion. Before you decide to undergo or assist in one, or even vote pro-choice, remember the very words the Lord spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai, and think ahead to the many years of memories and joy that will be cut short by such an ordeal.