Clinton Richard Dawkins ,  FRS , FRSL, (born March 26, 1941, age 76), is a British author,  biologist ,  evolutionist ,  agnostic  and  leftist / liberal  (See also:  Richard Dawkins and agnosticism ). [3]

He is sometimes referred to as the "world's most famous atheist" but when interviewed, he claims that, on a scale of 1 to 7, where 1 is perfect faith in God and 7 is perfect confidence in atheism, he is a 6.9. [4]

Most of Richard Dawkins' popular books have  promoted evolutionary pseudoscience.  Dawkins is also the former holder of the Charles Simonyi Chair of the Public Understanding of Science at  Oxford University .

He is an ardent opponent of religion, which he dismisses as mere  superstition . [5]   However, Dawkins has offered no effective rebuttal to studies which show that the irreligious  are more likely  to be superstitious than  evangelical   Christians . [6]

Dawkins is one of the principle founders of the  New Atheism  movement which is a form of  militant atheism  in terms of its  rhetoric . Dawkins said about New Atheism, "[O]ur struggle is not so much an intellectual struggle, as a political one: What are we going to do about it?”. [7]  In recent years, the prominence of Richard Dawkins and the New Atheism movement has greatly waned (see:  Richard Dawkins' loss of influence  and  Decline of New Atheism ).

In terms of the  theism  vs. agnosticism/ atheism  issue, Dawkins has shown himself to be rather ignorant in matters of  philosophy  and  theology .  For example, atheist philosopher Dr.  Michael Ruse  declared concerning Dawkins' book  The God Delusion : " The God Delusion  makes me embarrassed to be an atheist." [8]   
The philosopher  Antony Flew , who was one of the most prominent atheist academics in the world before adopting  deism , said  about Dawkins: “The fault of Dawkins as an academic…was his scandalous and apparently deliberate refusal to present the doctrine he appears to think he has refuted in its strongest form”. [9]

As far as the origin of the  universe , Dawkins wrote:  “The fact that  life evolved  out of nearly nothing, some 10 billion years after the universe evolved literally out of nothing, is a fact so staggering that I would be mad to attempt words to do it justice." [10]  See also:  Atheism and the origin of the universe

Dawkins is a  vocal opponent of Islam .  Dawkins has said,  " Islam  is the greatest force for evil in the world today". [11] [12]  Despite his opposition to religion/ Christianity , Dawkins indicated: "Christianity may actually be our best defence against aberrant forms of religion that threaten the world". [1] [2]  See also:  Richard Dawkins and Christianity

Richard Dawkins was born in Kenya. [16]  He was a child of a family of colonial forest officers. [17] 
Dawkins was raised to have religious values, and confesses that when he was young, he acknowledged the complexity of life and believed that it indicated a designer. However, during his teens, he chose to abandon this faith and embrace Darwinism instead, despite admitting that he hadn’t actually read  Charles Darwin ’s works. [18] [19]  See also:  British atheism  and  UK and secularism

The atheist philosopher  John Gray  says of Dawkins' time spent in  Kenya : "Unlike the best of the colonial administrators, some of whom were deeply versed in the languages and histories of the peoples they ruled, Dawkins displays no interest in the cultures of the  African  countries where he lived as a boy. It is the obedient devotion of those who served his family that has remained in his memory." [20]   See also:  Richard Dawkins' family fortune and the slave trade

Dawkins studied zoology at Oxford University, and graduated in 1962. As a undergraduate at Oxford, he studied zoology under the Dutch ethologist Niko Tinbergen and the two developed a strong student/teacher relationship. [21]  He remained at  Oxford  for his doctoral work, receiving his Ph.D in 1966.   From 1967-1969, Dawkins served as Assistant Professor of  Zoology  at  Berkeley . During this time, he was, in his own words, “heavily involved” in the unrest and liberal activism for which Berkeley is notorious. [19]  He returned to Oxford in 1970 and served as a Lecturer in Animal Behaviour and a Fellow of New College. In 1995, Dawkins became the Simonyi Professor of the Public Understanding of Science which was a post created by an endowment of £1.5m from Dr. Charles Simonyi. In September 2008, Richard Dawkins retired from his post as Simonyi Professor of the Public Understanding of Science.

Despite this, Richard Dawkins might have remained a relatively obscure professor if not for the publication of his first book,  The Selfish Gene , in 1976. This book became a bestseller, and brought Dawkins a celebrity which he has worked to maintain with further books and lectures.

In 1984, Dawkins divorced his wife of 17 years, Marian Stamp; later that same year, he married Eve Barham. Dawkins also divorced Barham, though the precise circumstances of this divorce are unclear. [22]  He married science fiction actress Lalla Ward in 1992 and they separated after 24 years of marriage. [23]

Theodore Beale  wrote in the his book  The Irrational Atheist  about Dawkins's claim that teaching children about  Hell  is more harmful to children than "mild child abuse":

In his letter to his daughter Juliet, addressed to her at the age of ten and published in  A Devil’s Chaplain , there is little mention of love, no admission of regret, and no paternal promises. As one British journalist noted, the letter is “coldly impersonal” and “authoritarian.” There is no expression of interest in what might be important to her. [24]

See also:  Richard Dawkins and love

The  Christian Times  reported:

In  his article piece   "Banishing the Green Eyed Monster," Dawkins referred to "jealousy" in a relationship as "immoral and selfish."

He defended that men should be allowed to keep mistresses and indulge in sexual pleasures with others. [25]

Since 2011, Dawkins has been embroiled in controversies related to  feminism / Islam  and he has received a significant amount of criticism from his fellow  secular leftists  as a result (see:  Richard Dawkins and women  and  Richard Dawkins and Islamophobia accusations ).

According to  The Richest , "Richard Dawkins..has an estimated net worth of $135 million ($100 euro) according to the  Sunday Times  in 2012." [26]  See also:  Richard Dawkins' net worth

See:  Richard Dawkins and women  and  Elevatorgate  and  Feminist quotes about Richard Dawkins  and  New Atheism and women  and  Atheism and rape

Survey data and website tracking data of prominent atheist websites indicate that in the Western World, atheism  is significantly less appealing to women .

According to the website tracking firm  Alexa , women frequent the website of richarddawkins.net significantly less than men. [28] [29]   In recent years, there has been a significant amount of friction between Richard Dawkins and  feminists  (see:  Richard Dawkins and women ).

See also:   Elevatorgate  and  Atheist feminism  and  Richard Dawkins and social media

In July 2011, Richard Dawkins was widely criticized within the atheist community and in various press outlets for his insensitive comments made to atheist  Rebecca Watson  about an incident which occurred in an elevator (see:  Elevatorgate ). [30]

Prior to Elevatorgate,  Monica Shores '  Ms. Magazine  article titled  Will “New Atheism” Make Room For Women?  criticized the News Atheism movement for being  sexist . [31]   She also cited  Conservapedia  in her article and indicated: "The lack of lady presence is so visible that Conservapedia commented on it by noting that  Dawkins’ website  overwhelmingly attracts male visitors." [32]

For more information, please see:

On August 6, 2014, Dawkins apologized for his remarks related to his Elevatorgate scandal. [15] [33]

However, on November 18, 2014, Richard Dawkins retracted his apology and indicated that: he stands by his recent remarks about women/men relations, he feels muzzled by "thought police" and that  Rebecca Watson 's experience in the elevator was "rather trivial" compared to events some Muslim women experience. [34]

Specifically, the  Washington Post  reported on November 18, 2014:

He trailed off momentarily, gazing at his hands resting on a patio table.

“I feel muzzled, and a lot of other people do as well,” he continued. “There is a climate of bullying, a climate of intransigent thought police which is highly influential in the sense that it suppresses people like me.”

Recent criticism of Dawkins has come from women, many of them within the  atheist movement , which has long drawn more men to its ranks. His online remarks, some women say, contribute to a climate they see as unwelcoming to female atheists...

“I concentrate my attention on that menace and I confess I occasionally get a little impatient with American women who complain of being inappropriately touched by the water cooler or invited for coffee or something which I think is, by comparison, relatively trivial,” he said. [13]

See also:   Feminist quotes about Richard Dawkins

An article by Sarah posted at  Skepchick  about a conversation between Richard Dawkins and  David Silverman , the president of the  American Atheists  organization, which took place during the planning phase of the  Reason Rally :

I was crushed. [35]

For more information, please see:  Elevatorgate

See also:   Atheist movement  and  Atheism and leadership

Post-Elevatorgate, Richard Dawkins is often criticized by secular leftists for igniting deep fractures in the  atheist movement  and hindering the atheist movement. For example, on November 26, 2013, the atheist activist and blogger  Jen McCreight  posted at Twitter the message: "Did anyone on Dawkins AMA ask how he feels about singlehandedly destroying the atheist movement with the Dear Muslima yet?" [36]  In December 2013, atheist Jack Vance at Atheist Revolution called July 2, 2011, which is the day that Elevatorgate occurred, "The day the atheist movement died." [37]

See also:   Richard Dawkins' health  and  Richard Dawkins' stroke  and  Richard Dawkins and medical science  and  Richard Dawkins, Darwin and psychogenic illness

As a result of the controversy relating to a Dawkins Twitter post about  feminism / Islam ,  Dawkins was disinvited to speak at the 2016 Northeast Conference on Science and Skepticism (NCSS) (See:  Feminists cause Richard Dawkins to be disinvited to skeptic conference ). [38]  Stephanie Zvan is an atheist blogger at  Freethought Blogs . She wrote an open letter to the  Center for Inquiry  (CFI) about the events surrounding the Dawkins' Twitter post about feminism/Islam that "CFI now has a harassment denialist on its board, a harassment denialist who has tied his denialism to his work at your organization." [39]

Dawkins said he was very upset about being disinvited to the conference. [38]  After his disinvitation, Dawkins gave some news about his health condition after suffering a minor stroke and he mentioned that his doctors advised avoiding controversies due to his chronic high blood pressure. [40]   In recent times Dawkins has been embroiled in a number of controversies involving the topics of  feminism / Islam  and he has faced a significant amount of criticism from his fellow  skeptics /liberals (see:  Richard Dawkins and women  and  Richard Dawkins and Islamophobia accusations ).

Atheist  Hemant Mehta  reported about Dawkins' stroke and Dawkins' report that he had been once again invited to the conference:

On the morning of Richard Dawkins' stroke, Dawkins received a letter from the NCSS apologizing to Dawkins for his disinvitation and once again inviting him to speak at the conference. [42]

Despite the medical advice of his doctors, Dawkins had a very active Twitter presence before his minor stroke (with a number of Twitter controversies) and numerous public controversies. [43]

Dawkins has  accumulated over 30,000 Twitter tweets. [44]   The Independent  reported, "Dawkins also admitted he wasn't very good at managing Twitter and the strong reactions his posts tend to provoke. 'Twitter is very difficult medium to handle,' he said. 'I’m not much of a diplomat.'" [45]   However, after his stroke, in May 2016, Dawkins  gave up posting on Twitter for awhile and the tweets that appeared in his name were done by his staff. [46]  See also:  Richard Dawkins and Twitter

Debates raged over praying for Richard Dawkins health after his stroke. [47] [48]

The Guardian  reported that Dawkins is expected to have a full recovery or near full recovery from his stroke. [49]

In December of 2016, Dawkins appears to have started to Tweet again despite his doctors warnings to avoid controversy (For example, he tweeted that Britain had become a "nasty little backwater" after the  Brexit  vote and his Tweet drew fierce criticism). [50] [51] [52]

See also:   Atheism and women  and  Richard Dawkins and women

In 2014, the prominent  New Atheist   PZ Myers  said of  Richard Dawkins' attitude towards women: "At a time when our movement needs to expand its reach, it’s a tragedy that our most eminent spokesman has so enthusiastically expressed such a regressive attitude.” [53]

Myers also said in 2014 concerning Dawkins:

...you persist in presenting these anti-feminist caricatures as reasonable. You say you are a feminist, and even find feminism an undeniable virtue, but at the same time you parrot absurd anti-feminist remarks. [54]

In 2010, the  Christian apologetics  website  True Free Thinker  wrote:

If Richard Dawkins had a better grasp of womanhood  and a greater grasp of manhood , he would still be married to his first wife and not his third. [55]

Another plausible explanation for many women having a lack of enthusiasm for Richard Dawkins's message is that many women who attend religious services and hold traditional beliefs and values find Richard Dawkins'  atheistic values  repugnant.  In terms of traditional values, in 2007, when asked in an interview, "If we do not acknowledge some sort of external [standard], what is to prevent us from saying that the  Muslim  [extremists] aren’t right?", Dawkins replied, "What’s to prevent us from saying  Hitler  wasn’t right? I mean, that is a genuinely difficult question, but whatever [defines morality], it’s not the  Bible . If it was, we’d be stoning people for breaking the  Sabbath ." [56]

(See also:  Richard Dawkins' commentary on Adolf Hitler )

See also:   Richard Dawkins and Islamophobia accusations  and  New Atheism and Islamophobia  and  Atheism vs. Islam

The  New Atheists  Richard Dawkins,  Sam Harris  and the late  Christopher Hitchens  have received multiple accusations of engaging in  Islamophobic  behavior. [58]  Dawkins is dismissive of the concept of Islamophobia and declared: "I’m always being accused of Islamophobia, that’s a non-word." [59]

On December 28, 2015, the  Daily Express  reported about Dawkins:

Dawkins, 74, author of best-seller The God Delusion, told the New Statesmen's Emad Ahmed that his belief was "pathetic" before angrily storming off. [60]

Ryan Kerney wrote at  New Republic  concerning Dawkins' behavior towards Emad Ahmed: "Richard Dawkins is just as rude in person as he is on Twitter, apparently." [61]

On the other hand, defenders of atheist criticisms of  Islam /Muslims indicated that New Atheists should be able to criticize Islam without being accused of Islamophobia. [62]

See also:   Western atheism and race  and  Atheism and leadership

Atheist  Sikivu Hutchinson  wrote:

The  secular humanist  document Human Manifesto II, which was written in 1973 by  Paul Kurtz  and Edwin H. Wilson, decried racism and it declared:

See also:   Atheism, agnosticism and pessimism  and  Atheism and the origin of the universe  and  Atheism and inspiration

According to Dawkins, "The universe we observe has precisely the properties we should expect if there is, at bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil, no good, nothing but blind, pitiless indifference." [65]

See also:   Evangelical atheism

Richard Dawkins is commonly thought to be an  evangelical atheist . [66] [67] [68]

Although evangelical atheists do not advocate the violent/murderous methods that the  militant atheists  of  communism  have employed, they generally favor using the power of state to indoctrinate children into believing various aspects of  atheist ideology  (see:  Atheist indoctrination ).  The new atheist Richard Dawkins claims that children need state protection from religion/religion of children's parents. [69]

See also:   Atheism and mockery

The new atheist Richard Dawkins has encouraged his supporters to go beyond humorous ridicule. [70]   He wrote, "I lately started to think that we need to go further: go beyond humorous ridicule, sharpen our barbs to a point where they really hurt." [70]  For more information please see:  Atheism and mockery  and  Abrasiveness of Richard Dawkins

See also:   Richard Dawkins on child molestation and so called "gentle pedophiles"  and  Atheism and pornography

On January 1, 2015,  The Telegraph  reported:

After a few minutes of mockery, the tweet was deleted. Perhaps even he realised how utterly mad it was. Which suggests a degree of self-awareness that I didn’t think possible in Britain’s nuttiest professor. [71]

See also:   Richard Dawkins' loss of influence  and  Atheism and public relations

Although the  New Atheist  Richard Dawkins was always known for  his abrasiveness  and  arrogance , post  Elevatorgate  and subsequent to his various embarrassing Twitter posts, many atheists are now asking if he is a liability to the  atheist movement . [72]

See also:

See also:   Richard Dawkins' cult of personality  and  Atheist cults  and  Atheism is a religion  and  Atheism and leadership

On August 16, 2014, Andrew Brown wrote an article for The Spectator entitled  The bizarre – and costly – cult of Richard Dawkins  which declared:

But the $85 a month just touches the hem of rationality. After the neophyte passes through the successively more expensive ‘Darwin Circle’ and then the ‘Evolution Circle’, he attains the innermost circle, where for $100,000 a year or more he gets to have a private breakfast or lunch with Richard Dawkins, and a reserved table at an invitation-only circle event with ‘Richard’ as well as ‘all the benefits listed above’, so he still gets a discount on his Richard Dawkins T-shirt saying ‘Religion — together we can find a cure.’

The website suggests that donations of up to $500,000 a year will be accepted for the privilege of eating with him once a year: at this level of contribution you become a member of something called ‘The Magic of Reality Circle’. I don’t think any irony is intended.

At this point it is obvious to everyone except the participants that what we have here  is a religion  without the good bits. [74]

Theodore Beale  noted that the Richard Dawkins cult has some similarity to the cult of  Scientology . [73] 
Dawkins was one of the founders of the New Atheism movement. The  New Atheism  movement, which has waned in recent years, was called a cult by the  agnostic , journalist Bryan Appleyard in a 2012 article in the  New Statesman  in which he describes the abusive behavior of New Atheists. [75]   Although the New Atheism movement does not perfectly fit the various characteristics of a cult, it does fit some of the characteristics. [76]

See also:  Richard Dawkins's Foundation and an embezzlement allegation  and  Atheist nonprofit scandals

See also:   Abrasiveness of Richard Dawkins  and  Richard Dawkins and anger  and  Atheism and leadership

Richard Dawkins has a reputation for being an aggressive and angry man (see:  Richard Dawkins and anger ).

Atheist author and  sociology  professor Phil Zuckerman said of Dawkins: "He is smug, condescending and emits an unpleasant disdainfulness. He doesn’t ever seem to acknowledge the good aspects of religion, only the bad. In that sense, I think he doesn’t help atheism in the PR department." [77]   See also:  Elevatorgate  and  Richard Dawkins quotes

Gary Demar  commenting on the abrasiveness and incivility of Richard Dawkins quotes Dawkins stating the following:

Dr. R.  Albert Mohler , Jr. has echoed Mr. Demar's estimation of Richard Dawkins and has stated regarding Richard Dawkins the following:

The September 2005 issue of Discover magazine features an article that raises this very question. In "Darwin's Rottweiler," author Stephen S. Hall suggests that Dawkins is simply "far too fierce."....

Dawkins admits that he just may be "a bit of a loose canon." In reality, that is a significant understatement. [78]

In addition, Richard Dawkins appears to have had struggles maintaining marital harmony in his life and three of his three marriages have ended in divorce (see also:  Women's views of Richard Dawkins ).

In September 2010, Richard Dawkins became nasty towards a woman in an audience he spoke before. [79]

Furthermore, Dawkins has developed a reputation for being angry  (see:  Richard Dawkins and anger ).

See also:   Atheism and humor

The movie  The Atheist Delusion  features Richard Dawkins being the object of audience laughter due to something unreasonable he said. [80]  Dawkins indignantly asked the audience, "Why is that funny?". [81]

See:   Atheism is a religion  and  Atheism and arrogance  and  Atheism and intolerance

Using special text analysis software, the social psychologist Jonathan Haidt found that  New Atheists , such as Richard Dawkins, very often wrote in dogmatic terms in their major works using words such as  “always,” “never,” “certainly,” “every,” and “undeniable.” [82]

Yet, the works of New Atheists, including Richard Dawkins, often betray an amateurish knowledge of philosophy, religion and science. For example,  Vox Day 's book  The Irrational atheist  found multiple errors in reasoning and factual errors when it came to the works of New Atheist authors. [83]  See also:  Richard Dawkins and pseudoscience

In a 2014 New Republic article entitled  The Closed Mind of Richard Dawkins: His atheism is its own kind of narrow religion , the atheist philosopher  John Gray  wrote:

See also:   Abortion and atheism  and  Atheism and social intelligence  and  Eugenics

In August 2014, Richard Dawkins caused a firestorm by claiming an unborn baby with  Down’s syndrome  should be aborted and that it would be “immoral to bring it into the world.” [84]  Dr. Michael Brown wrote in the  Christian Post  about this matter: "It is becoming increasingly clear that Dawkins is something of an embarrassment, even to other atheists (although he is still revered by many). The only question that remains is this: Are his irrational and immoral positions unique to him, or are they the logical outcome of his Darwinian evolutionism?" [85]  See also:  Social effects of the theory of evolution

A British father whose Down's syndrome daughter passed six General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) tests called Richard Dawkins an "ignorant idiot". [86]

In 2013,  Martin Robbins wrote in the  New Statesman  concerning the public persona of Dawkins: "Increasingly though, his public output resembles that of a man desperately grasping for attention and relevance..." [87]

Recently, Richard Dawkins has been reduced to Tweeting provocative Twitter posts in order to gain attention.  After the predictable ensuing uproar, Dawkins half-heartedly apologizes for the provocative Tweets. [88]

See also:   Richard Dawkins' loss of influence  and  Decline of New Atheism  and  Internet atheism

As can be seen by the graph below, by means of embedded code on his website from Quantcast, Quantcast directly measured the web traffic of Richard Dawkins' website. Traffic to Dawkins website is significantly down post- Elevatorgate . See also:  Internet atheism

Although his following of Dawkian atheist has significantly waned post-Elevatorgate and due to his generally  abrasive manner , he does retain a small cult following (See:  Richard Dawkins' loss of influence  and  Richard Dawkins' cult of personality  and  Atheist cults ).

Furthermore, the New Atheism movement has greatly waned in terms of its prominence (see:   Decline of New Atheism ).

See also:   Alexa rankings of Richard Dawkins' website

See also:   Atheism and science

The Independent  reported:

Criticism of the British evolutionary biologist came up repeatedly in a new study looking at public understanding of science and how scientists feel that they are portrayed in the media – despite respondents never actually being asked about him. The research was published in a recent edition of Public Understandings of Science as part of a broader study looking at how scientists feel about religion.

As part of the study, the researchers conducted a survey of over 20,000 scientists from eight countries. In the UK, the researchers surveyed 1,581 randomly sampled scientists. They then spoke to 137 of them for in-depth interviews to see what they thought.

Though Dawkins wasn’t a part of the interview process, and researchers didn’t ask about him, 48 of the 137 British scientists they spoke to mentioned Dawkins. Of those 48 that referenced him, 80 per cent said they thought that Dawkins misrepresents science and scientists in his books and public speeches, according to the study by Rice University, Texas. [94]

See also:   Richard Dawkins and pseudoscience  and  Irreligion and superstition

Within the  evolutionary  science community and the  creation science  community, Richard Dawkins has faced charges of engaging in  pseudoscience  and also has faced charges of committing elementary errors. [95] [96]

The website  True Free Thinker  notes:

Even renowned evolutionary biologists H. Allen Orr, David Sloan Wilson, and Massimo Pigliucci have called into question the power that Dawkins once had as an intellectual, since he has made elementary errors in  The God Delusion . [95]

In 2010, a new discovery relating to the  eye  further discredited the  evolutionary  quackery of Richard Dawkins. [97]  In addition, in 2010, the journal  Nature  featured an interview with the evolutionist, biologist, and atheist David Sloan Wilson who criticized Richard Dawkins for denying the evidence for the societal benefits of religion (see also:  Atheism and Mental and Physical Health ). [98]

As far as the the social science of  history , Richard Dawkins has  engaged in historical revisionism when it comes to the mass murders committed by atheists .

Many of Richard Dawkins detractors are  conservative   Christians  which is not surprising. As alluded to earlier, the  Wall Street Journal  reported: "A comprehensive new study released by Baylor University yesterday, shows that  traditional Christian religion  greatly decreases belief in everything from the efficacy of palm readers to the usefulness of  astrology . It also shows that the irreligious and the members of more liberal Protestant denominations, far from being resistant to  superstition , tend to be much more likely to believe in the paranormal and in  pseudoscience  than evangelical Christians." [6]  In the  United States , CBS News reported in October 2005 that the  Americans most likely to believe only in the theory of evolution are liberals . [99]

See also:   Richard Dawkins and agnosticism  and  Atheism, agnosticism and flip-flopping  and  Atheists doubting the validity of atheism

Although Dawkins declared himself an agnostic in his 2006 book  The God Delusion , he declared that atheist evangelism is important. [100]  Author  Vox Day  wrote concerning this matter, "While the fact that Dawkins declared himself a literal agnostic in the very book in which he declared the importance of atheist evangelism is both ironic and incoherent, it will surprise no one who has read the chapter of  The Irrational Atheist  entitled "Darwin's Judas". [100]  Also, despite being an elderly self-declared agnostic, in his book  The God Delusion , Dawkins said that "permanent agnosticism in principle" is "fence-sitting, intellectual cowardice". [101]  In February 2012, Dawkins declared that he believed that there is a 6.9 out of 7 probability of  God 's non-existence (approximately a 1 percent probability that God exist). [100] [102]

Although Dawkins declared that he was an  agnostic  in 2006 and 2012, in 2002 Richard Dawkins publicly argued for the position of  militant atheism  and claimed that he will not feel anything after death (see also:  Ex-atheists ). [100] [103] [104]  Despite arguing for the position of militant atheism previously, Dawkins told the Archbishop Dr.  Rowan Williams  that he never said was an atheist. [105] [106] [107]  See also:  Richard Dawkins and agnosticism  and  Atheism and historical revisionism

The historian Dr. Tim Stanley wrote that he believed Dawkins is taking a foolish gamble and Dawkins is risking spending an eternity in  hell . [102]  Dr. Don Batten, a scientist at  Creation Ministries International , wrote that despite Richard Dawkins' skeptical protestations, Dawkins appears to be a  God -hater. [108]

A supporter of the  Question evolution! campaign  wrote:

In 2012, in video recorded discussion with Rowan Williams Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Dawkins said he was 6.9 out of 7 of sure that God does not exist and counted himself as an agnostic.

A 6.9 out of 7 would mean that Richard Dawkins believes there is about a .986 percent chance that God exists. In short, according to Dawkins, there is about a 1% chance that God exists.

Since Richard Dawkins likened God's existence to fairies being at the bottom of the garden, why does Dawkins believe there is about a 1% chance that fairies are at the bottom of the garden?

Dawkins is either being disingenuous or he is being irrational or a combination of both is occurring. Anyone who gives weight to Dawkins' views on the existence of God or his views on the creation vs. evolution controversy is obviously displaying bad judgement.

Sin is very irrational. Dr. Don Batten, a scientist at Creation Ministries International, wrote that despite Richard Dawkins' skeptical protestations, Dawkins appears to be a God-hater. This seems to be the best description of Dawkins' behavior.

It really comes as no surprise that Dawkins has been noticeably quiet about the
 15 questions  for evolutionists of the  Question Evolution! Campaign . He obviously cannot satisfactorily answer the 15 questions. [109]

On June 5, 2012, the  Christian  Post reported:

"Dawkins will tell the story of his own intellectual evolution, explaining how his groundbreaking work as a scientist led to his work as an atheist," states Dawkins' new publisher HarperCollins' Ecco. The book has not yet been given a title, but is expected to be on bookshelves by 2014. [110]

In response a supporter of the Question evolution! campaign wrote in an article entitled  Atheism is rudderless and unseaworthy :

First, Richard Dawkins has gone from being  a militant atheist  to being  an agnostic .

Vox Day  wrote  about Dawkins' inconsistency when it comes to the issues of atheism and agnosticism...

Christians should call Dawkins on his disingenuous  flip-flopping  if his publisher continues to promote the book as a book focusing on his journey to atheism without mentioning the fact that Dawkins is presently an agnostic who has rejected atheism.

An author calling himself an atheist or a publisher giving the impression that someone is an atheist may sell more books as it is more provocative, but it isn't intellectually honest if the author has rejected atheism and is an agnostic. If Dawkins claims to be an agnostic who is unsure if God exist or not, then he should clearly communicate this to the public and so should his publisher. Dawkins has been unreasonable as far as his alleged agnosticism and I recommend reading the article  Why does Richard Dawkins have such a high belief in the possibility of fairies being at the bottom of the garden?

Given the weakness of his argumentation and the vitriol which often accompanies it, I agree with Dr. Don Batten that the weight of the evidence points to Dawkins being a God-hater. [111]

A July 25, 2012 article entitled  Is Richard Dawkins a flip-flopper  declared:

Think about it. If there was a 1% chance that something existed, would you call your neighbor delusional if he believed it existed? No, you would not. Sure, you would think the odds are against your neighbor in terms of his belief, but you would not think he is delusional. The term delusional is generally used in connection with ideas that are insane to believe due to there being overwhelming evidence to the contrary. [112]

See also:   Richard Dawkins and Creation Ministries International  and  Richard Dawkins' public refusal to debate creationists  and  Instances of Richard Dawkins ducking debates

In 2008, a video clip featuring Richard Dawkins became widely available to the public, showing Dawkins  [115] 
 being stumped  by a question from the creationist interviewer.
A shortened version has been translated into 10 languages.
The clip was part of an interview included in the video and DVD  From a Frog to Prince , produced by  Creation Ministries International  about the genetic information required by evolution, and the interviewer is asking Dawkins for an example of genetic information arising from a mutation.

In later interviews, Dawkins claims that he was not stumped, but instead shocked when he realized that the interviewer was a  creationist , and the video was edited in a way to make him look like he was unable to answer the question. [116]  However, the question came after he had that realization, and after the creationists negotiated with Dawkins and he agreed to continue. [117] 
However, despite being given a free reign in a sceptic publication to respond, he still didn't provide any examples.  Recently, a creationist produced an excellent  YouTube  video demonstrating the Richard Dawkins still has not answered the question posed to him by the interviewer and he uses Richard Dawkins own words to demonstrate this fact. [114]   The  video  can be found at  YouTube  and is entitled  Is Richard Dawkins Really Stumped? The Truth - In His Own Words - YES...he is!

As noted earlier, Dr. Don Batten of  Creation Ministries International  theorizes that Richard Dawkins is a God hater and not a skeptic. [118]  The video in which Richard Dawkins  clearly squirms  when asked for an example of genetic information arising from a mutation and dodges the question with an unrelated monologue, certainly gives some credence to Dr. Batten's postulate. Richard Dawkins inept response relating to the existence of God during his interview with Ben Stein further bolsters the view that Richard Dawkins is more motivated by hatred towards God than any inward assurance Dawkins has concerning the validity of his skeptical contentions. VIDEO   There is certainly historical precedence for evolutionists/atheists having inward doubts about the validity of evolution and atheism. The evolutionist  Charles Darwin   wrote in a private notebook that he was a  materialist  (a type of atheist). [119]  Late in  Charles Darwin's  life, Darwin told the Duke of Argyll that he frequently had overwhelming thoughts that the natural world was the  result of design . [120]

Richard Dawkins  has been inconsistent concerning his supposed refusal to debate creationists  and his refusal is merely a ruse to avoid losing debates to creation scientists. Generally speaking,  creationist scientists  tend to win the creation vs. evolution debates (see:  Creation vs. evolution debates ).

See also:   Richard Dawkins' commentary on Adolf Hitler  and  Richard Dawkins and morality  and  Atheists and historical illiteracy

As noted earlier, when asked in an interview, "If we do not acknowledge some sort of external [standard], what is to prevent us from saying that the  Muslim  [extremists] aren’t right?", Dawkins replied, "What’s to prevent us from saying  Hitler  wasn’t right? I mean, that is a genuinely difficult question, but whatever [defines morality], it’s not the  Bible . If it was, we’d be stoning people for breaking the  Sabbath ." [56]

The interviewer wrote in response, "I was stupefied. He had readily conceded that his own  philosophical  position  did not offer a rational basis for moral judgments.  His intellectual honesty was refreshing, if somewhat disturbing on this point." [56]

For additional information, please see:

See also:   Richard Dawkins and debate  and  Atheism and cowardice  and  Atheism vs. Christianity debates

As far as Christianity vs. atheism public debates, in recent years there have been a number of notable instances of atheists being reluctant to debate and doing poorly in debates (see:  Atheism vs. Christianity debates ).

Richard Dawkins has  established a reputation  for avoiding debates  with his strongest opponents. On May 14, 2011, the  British  newspaper  The Daily Telegraph  published a news story entitled  Richard Dawkins accused of cowardice for refusing to debate existence of God . [121]  In  The Daily Telegraph  article Dr.  Daniel Came , a member of the Faculty of  Philosophy  at Oxford University, was quoted as writing to fellow atheist Richard Dawkins concerning his refusal to debate Dr.  William Lane Craig : "The absence of a debate with the foremost  apologist  for  Christian   theism  is a glaring omission on your  CV  and is of course apt to be interpreted as  cowardice  on your part." [122]

In October 2011, Dr. Craig went to England and the Daily Telegraph declared that Dawkins is either a fool or a coward for his refusal to debate William Lane Craig plus declared that Dawkins is a "proud man" and a "coward" who puts on an "illiterate, angry schtick" for the public. [123]   In addition,  Christian apologist   Ken Ammi  called Dawkins a "cowardly clown" because Dawkins and other prominent skeptics/atheists refused to debate  Creation Ministries International  at the 2010 Global Atheist Convention. [124]  For more information please see:  Atheism and cowardice

Richard Dawkins is known for his vehement and sometimes vitriolic promotion of  weak atheism  and the evolutionary paradigm. Dawkins has repeatedly likened religious faith to a mental defect. Mr. Dawkins currently resides in the  UK . He was an assistant professor of Zoology at the  University of California, Berkeley  for two years before becoming a zoology researcher at  Oxford .

See also:   Richard Dawkins and Rabbi Shmuley Boteach  and  Atheism and Debate  and  Atheism and cowardice

As briefly noted earlier Richard Dawkins had a debate with Rabbi  Shmuley Boteach . Rabbi Shmuley Boteach was named the London Times Preacher of the Year 2000 and is the author of 20 books. [125]

Recently Rabbi Shmuley Boteach wrote:

WorldNetDaily  offers the following quotes of Rabbi Boteach about debate and the initial denial by Dawkins that the debate never took place:

"In a vote at the end of the debate as to how many students had changed their minds after hearing the arguments, Dawkin's side was defeated and religion prevailed, which might account for his selective memory," he wrote. [126]

Rabbi Boteach reported at Beliefnet:

A video of the debate that Dawkins lost to Rabbi Shmuley Boteach is available at Rabbi Schely Boteach's website.

A supporter of the  Question evolution campaign  wrote:

Furthermore, an angry and embarrassed Dawkins then claimed the rabbi shrieked like Adolf Hitler. Now tell me, how do you forget a debate with a rabbi who supposedly shrieks like Adolf Hitler? Obviously, Dawkins exposed himself for the clown and fraud he is. [127]

See also:   Richard Dawkins' debate with Giles Fraser  and  Richard Dawkins quotes

On February 19, 2012  The Daily Telegraph  reported:

On February 14, 2012,  The Daily Telegraph  reported regarding the radio debate:

Vox Day  wrote concerning the embarrassing incident for Dawkins:

It's bad enough that Dawkins couldn't come up with the name of what he considers to be the most important book ever written immediately after claiming he could do so, but in addition to stumbling a little on the subtitle, he even forgot the rather important part of the title that refers to the actual mechanism supposedly responsible! [130]

(The full title of Charles Darwin's book is  On the  The Origin of Species  by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life  and evolutionists rarely cite the book's full title which is racist. See:  Evolutionary racism )

See also:   Atheism and charity  and  Atheism and love

Scott Simon of  National Public Radio  (NPR): "I have covered a lot of wars, famines and tragedies. And it seems to me, truly every theatre of suffering I have ever been to, there is a dauntless nun, priest, clergy or religious person, who is working very selflessly and bravery there for the good of human beings. But I don't run into  organized atheists  who do this.

Richard Dawkins: "Perhaps there is not enough of them."...

Scott Simon, NPR: "But I do wonder am I just not seeing the world correctly to see large numbers of well-motivated atheists lending their lives to trying to better the world... If I might put it this way, are they just more concerned about being right intellectually." [131]

See also:   New Atheism  and  Causes of the New Atheism movement

The term  New Atheism  which first appeared in the November 2006 edition of  Wired  magazine, is used to describe a new incarnation of  militant atheism  and also frequently applied to a series of six best-selling books by five authors that appeared in the period between 2004–2008.  These authors include Richard Dawkins,   Christopher Hitchens ,  Sam Harris ,  Daniel Dennett  and  Victor J. Stenger . [132]  The four most prominent writers of the New Atheist movement are Richard Dawkins, Christopher Hitchens, Sam Harris and Daniel Dennett.

The New Atheism movement was a reaction the  September 11, 2001 attacks  on Manhattan and also due to  antitheist  anger over the failure of the  secularization thesis  (the secularization thesis wrongly predicted that religion would fade away and it also did not predict the  resurgence of religion  in much of the world). [133] [134]

For more information, please see:  Causes of the New Atheism movement

See also:   Desecularization  and  Atheist pessimism about the atheist movement

New Atheism has not had much of an impact in terms of gaining new adherents to  atheism .  In a March 10, 2008  USA Today  article Stephen Prothero stated the following regarding the impact of the "New Atheism":

For some, the story of this survey, based on interviews in multiple languages with more than 35,000 adults, is the strength of American Religion.

Not too long ago, I wrote that  American atheism  was going the way of the freak show.  As books by Christopher Hitchens and other "new atheists" climbed the best seller lists, I caught a lot of flak for that prophecy. But atheist make up only 1.6% of respondents to this survey.... [135]

YouTube atheist  Thunderfoot  said about the atheist movement after  Reason Rally 2016  had a very low turnout:

On the other hand, Stephen LeDrew wrote at  Oxford University  Press's Academic Insights for the Thinking World website:

Social science in general has not yet fully appreciated the significance of the New Atheism and has tended not to take it very seriously, with the exception of those working in the new sub-discipline of secularity studies. But whatever one might think of the New Atheists’ ideas, an honest appraisal would recognize that they have had a significant and lasting impact.

They should be remembered for catalyzing a movement for religious dissent and inspiring atheists to come together and find a voice in American public life. But there’s a much darker side to the legacy of the New Atheism that stems from its imperialist and xenophobic tendencies, to say nothing of some thinly veiled Social Darwinism and  arguments  for eugenics. Sam Harris in particular is now known more for  supporting the Israeli occupation of Palestine  and  ethnic profiling  at airport security than for his science-based critique of religious faith. Richard Dawkins’ personal legacy has taken a heavy hit in the past few years, as his rambling criticisms of feminism and Muslim “barbarians” on Twitter have led to charges of  sexism ,  racism , and general arrogance and intolerance. [137]

The  liberal  leaning British newspaper  The Guardian  said regarding the New Atheism:

These increasingly hysterical books may boost the pension, they may be morale boosters for a particular kind of American atheism that feels victimized - the latest candidate in a flourishing American tradition - but one suspects that they are going to do very little to challenge the appeal of a phenomenon they loathe too much to understand. [138]

In 2010, it was reported that  The God Delusion  sold 2,086,402 copies and 907,161 of those copies were sold in  North America .  Contrastly, in 2010, the  evangelical Christian   Rick Warren  sold between 25,000,000 to 50,000,000 copies of his book  The Purpose Driven Life . [139]

See also:   Decline of New Atheism  and  Decline of New Atheism and the media

On November 6, 2015, the  New Republic  published an article entitled,  Is the New Atheism dead? [140]

In 2015, the atheist author Joshua Kelly wrote:

Also, on July 31, 2012 in an article entitled  Evolutionists, atheists and agnostics: Where is your master plan to reverse your decline?  supporters of the  Question evolution! campaign  indicated that atheists, agnostics and evolutionists lack a plan to reverse their global decline. [142]

Using academic studies, survey data and other information, supporters of the  Question evolution! campaign  maintain that including Richard Dawkins, there is a lack of sound leadership within the agnostic/atheist and evolutionist communities.

See:

See also:   Richard Dawkins on child molestation and so called "gentle pedophiles"  and  Atheism and child pornography  and  and  Atheism, pederasty and NAMBLA

The  Australian Conservative  recently published an article by Ben-Peter Terpstra entitled  Preparing for Richard Dawkins’ crocodile tears  which charges that Richard Dawkins exhibits selective outrage on the issue of child molestation. In the article Terpstra cites Bendan Oneill who wrote:

In 2006, Dawkins criticised ‘hysteria about paedophilia’ and said that, even though he was the victim of sexual abuse at boarding school, he would defend his abusive former teachers if ‘50 years on they had been hounded by vigilantes or lawyers as no better than child murderers’. Yet now he wants to put abusive priests on a par with genocidaires. [143]

Ben-Peter Terpstra writes: "In all truth, Britain’s clean-shaven atheists aren’t serious about children’s rights, or they’d be launching venomous attacks against the  United Nations , in light of their more recent sex abuse scandals."

Concerning Richard Dawkins recent selective outrage on child molestation the Christian apologetics website  True Free Thinker  writes:

What! “Gentle pedophiles”!!!

Oh, no, no, no; those are not my words but Richard Dawkins who, indeed, argues that there are gentle pedophiles and that way too much is made of pedophilia at times.

For these reasons and more Robert Fulford’s referring to Richard Dawkins as a clown is very, very offensive—to clowns. Clowns are lovable and funny whilst Richard Dawkins is belligerent, arrogant, belittling and shockingly lacking in knowledge with regards to many of the issues that he takes on (find ample evidence  here ). [144]

See:  Richard Dawkins' on child abuse and children believing in Hell

See also:   Atheism and profanity  and  Richard Dawkins' battle with online fans  and  Atheism and the internet

In February 2010, the news organization  The Telegraph  reported Richard Dawkins was "embroiled in a bitter online battle over plans to rid his popular internet forum for atheists of foul language, insults and 'frivolous gossip'." [145]  Richard Dawkins  has a reputation for being abrasive  so the behavior of his fans is not entirely surprising. See:  Atheism and profanity

It is commonly  thought that some individuals who commonly use profanity have limited vocabularies and imaginations. [146] [147]

For more information please see:   Richard Dawkins on homosexuality  and  Genetics, Homosexuality, Evolutionary Paradigm, and Creation Science  and  Atheism and homosexuality

Richard Dawkins, who is a liberal,  speculates that a "gay gene" causes  homosexuality , but science has not discovered such a gene (see:  Causes of homosexuality ) [148]  In 1993, Professor  Miron Baron , M.D., the renowned medical researcher and Professor at  Columbia University , wrote in  BMJ  (British Medical Journal)  that there is a  conflict relative to the  theory of evolution  and the notion of  genetic   determinism  concerning homosexuality.  Dr. Baron wrote "...from an evolutionary perspective,  genetically determined   homosexuality would have become  extinct  long ago because of reduced reproduction." [149]  In the United States, liberals are  more likely  to believe in evolution. [99]   Also, in the United States, twice as many liberals as conservatives (46% versus 22%) believe people are born homosexual and liberals generally have  more favorable  opinions about homosexuality. Given Dr.  Miron Baron 's commentary about homosexuality, many American liberals are inconsistent on the issues of evolution and homosexuality.

An individual's beliefs regarding  creation science / creationism  and the theory of evolution appear to influence their views on homosexuality. Creationist scientists and creationist assert that the theory of evolution cannot account for the origin of gender and sexual reproduction. [150] [151]   Creation Ministries International  states: "Homosexual acts go against  God ’s original  design  of a man and a woman becoming one flesh — see  Genesis  1 and 2, endorsed by  Jesus  Himself in  Matthew 19:3–6 ." [152]   In addition, the vast majority of creation scientists reject the notion of  genetic   determinism  concerning the  origin of homosexuality . [151]

See also:

Richard Dawkins has accused the  God  of the  Old Testament  of being  homophobic . [153]  Yet, Dawkins has not explained why God, who is described as an all powerful spiritual being in the Old Testament, would be afraid of homosexuals.

See also:   Richard Dawkins and Jesse Kilgore  and  Atheism and depression  and  Atheism and suicide  and  Atheism and Mental and Physical Health

Dawkins' book "The God Delusion" along with a  community college  biology class, have been linked to the tragic suicide of Jesse Kilgore. [154]  Kilgore had several discussions with friends and relatives in which he made it clear Dawkins' book had destroyed his belief in God. This loss of faith is considered the cause of his suicide which is not surprising given that there is evidence which suggest that atheism can  be a causal factor  for suicide for some individuals. [155] [155] [156]

Jesse's father is quoted as saying "If my son was a professing  homosexual , and a professor challenged him to read [a book called] 'Preventing Homosexuality'… If my son was gay and [the book] made him feel bad, hopeless, and he killed himself, and that came out in the press, there would be an outcry. He would have been a victim of a hate crime and the professor would have been forced to undergo sensitivity training, and there may have even been a wrongful death lawsuit. But because he's a  Christian , I don't even get a return telephone call."

Jesse's blog remains online after his death. [157]

Please see:  Atheism and depression  and  Atheism and suicide

In the film  Expelled: No Intelligence Allowed , a documentary concerning suppression of the  intelligent design  movement,  Ben Stein  interviewed Richard Dawkins.

In the movie  Expelled: No Intelligence Allowed ,  Ben Stein  demonstrated the folly of  evolutionism  in his interview with Richard Dawkins ( A clip of the interview has been uploaded to YouTube  ).

The  Discovery Institute  provides an transcript of part of the interview along with some commentary:

DAWKINS: "Well, it could come about in the following way. It could be that at some earlier time, somewhere in the universe, a civilization evolved, probably by some kind of Darwinian means, probably to a very high level of technology, and designed a form of life that they seeded onto perhaps this planet. Now, um, now that is a possibility, and an intriguing possibility. And I suppose it's possible that you might find evidence for that if you look at the details of biochemistry, molecular biology, you might find a signature of some sort of designer."

Ho,ho! That is precisely what the  Raelians  say:

Years ago, everybody knew that the earth was flat. Everybody knew that the sun revolved around the earth. Today, everybody knows that life on earth is either the result of random evolution or the work of a supernatural God. Or is it? In "Message from the Designers", Rael presents us with a third option: that all life on earth was created by advanced scientists from another world.

Richard Dawkins and Rael; "clear thinking" kindred spirits!
 [158]

A  Christian apologetics  website provides some additional commentary on the Ben Stein/Richard Dawkins interview which focuses on Dawkins response to Ben Stein's questions about the likelihood of the existence of God:

Stein expressed surprise in the narration that Richard Dawkins "believe[d] in intelligent design." [160]

Instead of attempting to defend  abiogenesis , Dawkins actually suggested  directed panspermia —the very thing that  Francis Crick  once suggested to explain life's beginnings.

On March 20, 2008, Dawkins and colleague  P. Z. Myers  tried to gain entry to a special preview of the Ben Stein documentary, though no member of the production team had invited them. Dr. Myers was not allowed in, but Dawkins was. Accounts vary as to why this was so; the production team asserts that they decided to grant Dawkins entry on-the-spot because

Richard Dawkins arranged to have a filmed conversation between Richard Dawkins and  PZ Myers  concerning this incident posted to YouTube [162]  In it Myers claimed that the production team had full knowledge of his attendance through the online RSVP system and Dawkins claimed that it was an "incredible piece of inept public relations" to "expel" PZ Myers from a film about people being expelled for their views. Both PZ Myers and Richard Dawkins were featured in the film.

For more information please see:   Richard Dawkins, atheist atrocities, and historical revisionism  and  Atheists and historical illiteracy  and  Atheism and historical revisionism

Dinesh D'Souza  took Richard Dawkins to task for engaging in  historical revisionism  when it comes to the atrocities of  atheist  regimes and declared Dawkins "reveals a complete ignorance of history". VIDEO

In a recent interview D'Souza declared:

It was no accident, as the Marxists liked to say, that they shut down the churches and persecuted the clergy...

Dinesh D'Souza stated in another interview:

Karl Marx  said "[Religion] is the opium of the people". Marx also stated: " Communism  begins from the outset (Owen) with atheism; but atheism is at first far from being communism; indeed, that atheism is still mostly an abstraction." [164]

Vladimir Lenin  wrote: "A Marxist must be a  materialist , i. e., an enemy of religion, but a dialectical materialist, i. e., one who treats the struggle against religion not in an abstract way, not on the basis of remote, purely theoretical, never varying preaching, but in a concrete way, on the basis of the  class struggle  which is going on in practice and is educating the masses more and better than anything else could." [165]

Dr. R. J. Rummel, professor emeritus of political science at the University of Hawaii, is the scholar who first coined the term  democide  (death by government). Dr. R. J. Rummel's mid estimate concerning the loss of life due to communism is that communism caused the death of approximately 110,286,000 people between 1917 and 1987. [166]  The atheism in  communist  regimes has been and continues to be  militant atheism  that has committed various acts of repression including the razing of thousands of religious buildings and the killing, imprisoning, and the oppression of religious leaders and believers (for details see:  communism ). In the atheistic and communist Soviet Union, 44 anti religious museums were opened and the largest was the 'The Museum of the History of Religion and Atheism' in  Leningrad ’s Kazan cathedral. [167]

See also:   Atheists and historical illiteracy  and  Historicity of Jesus

John Lennox  pointed out to Richard Dawkins that Dawkins claimed in his book  The God Delusion  that  Jesus Christ  may have never existed and that Dawkins errantly claimed that ancient historians have some disagreement on whether Jesus existed or not. After some additional discussion with Dawkins, Dawkins conceded that Jesus existed and said, "I take that back. Jesus existed". [168]

See also:   Richard Dawkins and William Lane Craig  and  Atheism and cowardice  and  Atheism and Debate

Dr. William Lane Craig is one of  Christianity's leading defenders  and many individuals over the years have attempted to arrange a debate between Dr. Craig and Richard Dawkins. Richard Dawkins has offered various ruses on why he will not debate William Lane Craig, which Dr. Craig supporters have shown were inconsistent and merely a dodge to avoid debating one of Christianity's strongest advocates. [169]

Christian apologist  Dr. Victor Reppert is the author of  C. S. Lewis 's Dangerous Idea: In Defense of the Argument from Reason . [170]  In 2007, Dr. Reppert wrote:

The coward! He said, "I've never heard of  William
Craig . A debate with him might look good on his
resume, but it wouldn't look good on mine!"

Bill [170]

There was public pressure for Dawkins to debate the Christian  philosopher  of science and Christian apologist Dr.  William Lane Craig . [171]  For example,  currently there is a petition for Richard Dawkins debate William Lane Craig. [171]

As far as Dawkins and and his comfort level around professional philosophers, the atheist philosopher Massimo Pigliucci wrote:

See also:   Richard Dawkins and Dinesh D'Souza  and  Atheism and Debate  and  Atheism and cowardice

Christian author  Dinesh D'Souza  wrote concerning Richard Dawkins refusal to debate him: "To be honest, I find your behavior extremely bizarre. You go halfway around the world to chase down televangelists to outsmart them in an interview format that you control, but given several opportunities to engage the issues you profess to care about in a true spirit of open debate and inquiry, you duck and dodge and run away." [173]  D'Souza further wrote concerning Dawkins: "When he is confronted with history, philosophy, and logic, Dawkins seems to have very little to say." [174]  Next, D'Souza indicated Dawkins was a "showman who takes on unprepared and unsuspecting opponents when you yourself control the editing, but when a strong opponent shows up you manufacture reasons to avoid him." [173]  Lastly, D'Souza wrote: "So why doth Dawkins languish in his corner, attended by sycophants? Tremble not, Sir Richard. 'Cowards die many times before their deaths. The valiant do taste of death but once.'" [175]

Dr. Jamie Glazov wrote concerning the refusal of Richard Dawkins to debate Dinesh D'Souza:

For more information please see:  Richard Dawkins' public refusal to debate creationists  and  Atheism and cowardice  and  Global atheism

Richard Dawkins has publicly declared that he will not debate creationists. [169]  Yet, Richard Dawkins debated the theist John Lennox who adheres to the position of  intelligent design . [169]  According to Richard Dawkins, intelligent design is a form of creationism. [169]  Therefore, Richard Dawkins is not consistent and trustworthy concerning his assertion that he will not debate creationists. [169]   Evolutionists and atheists inconsistency concerning debating creationists was commented on by the  Christian apologetic  website  True Free Thinker  which declared: "Interestingly enough, having noted that since some atheists refuse to debate “creationists” but then go on to debate some of those people but not others, it is clear that they are, in reality, being selective and making excuses for absconding from difficulties..." [177]  When Richard Dawkins refused to debate Dr. William Lane Craig one of the ruses Richard Dawkins used was supposedly because Dr. Craig was a creationist and Richard Dawkins claimed he didn't debate creationist. [169]  Richard was called on his inconsistency and lack of trustworthiness concerning his excuses for refusing to debate Dr. Craig by the intelligent design advocate Clive Hayden. [169]

In 2010, the prominent atheists who attended the 2010 global atheist conference, which included Richard Dawkins, were challenged to a debate by Creation Ministries International. [176]  Richard Dawkins,  PZ Myers  and other prominent atheists refused to debate the creation scientists at Creation Ministries International. [176]  As noted above, generally speaking, creationist scientists tend to win the creation vs. evolution debates (see:  Creation vs. evolution debates ).

The refusal of Richard Dawkins and other prominent atheists to debate the staff of Creation Ministries International is not surprising given that there are several instances Richard Dawkins avoiding strong debate opponents. In addition, creationists maintain that Richard Dawkins did not give a particularly strong showing at the  Huxley Memorial Debate . One of the more embarrassing debates (particular the events surrounding the debate) was the case of Richard Dawkins losing a video taped debate to Rabbi Boteach according to the college audience. [125] [126]  After the debate,  Richard Dawkins denied the debate ever took place and Rabbi Boteach provided the video taped evidence that the debate did take place. [125] [126]  Mr. Dawkins has declined to debate Rabbit Shmuley Boteach another time. [125] [126]  Incidentally, Paul Humber notes there was a deception that occurred during email correspondence with Mr. Dawkins concerning the tally of vote counts that occurred for the Oxford debate between creation scientists Professor A.E. Wilder-Smith and Professor Edgar Andrews and evolutionists Richard Dawkins and John Maynard Smith (see:  Huxley Memorial Debate ) [178]  Mr. Humber did not indicate whether Mr. Dawkins committed the deception or was merely duped by someone who provided an altered account. [178]

The website  True Free Thinker  declared concerning the refusal of Richard Dawkins,  PZ Myers  and other prominent atheists to debate the  creation scientists  and other staff at Creation Ministries International:

Enter Jonathan Sarfati (PhD in chemistry),senior scientist at Creation Ministries International, who recently published the book “The Greatest Hoax on Earth? Refuting Dawkins on Evolution.” Interestingly, Jonathan Sarfati sought to publish the book by the time that the 2010 Global Atheist Convention—billed as “The Rise of Atheism”—of March 12–14 at the Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Center in Australia.

The most intelligent, well informed and vociferous atheists in the world, including  Richard Dawkins ,  Dan Barker ,  PZ Myers , et al, were challenged to debate while their worldwide choir was gathered in one place and yet, one by one they each found excuses to cower from debate even whilst proclaiming to their adherents the intellectual superiority of atheism. [176]

Richard Dawkins has offered some  unjustifiable ruses for not not wanting to debate creationists but the true reason is that he knows he will lose the debates .

There are certainly reputable scientists, medical doctors and members of the public who hold the evolutionary paradigm in low esteem for valid reasons so Dawkins excuses for refusing to debate creationists simply have little to no weight and they are certainly not the best explanation for Mr. Dawkins' behavior in this matter. In 2007, " Discovery Institute 's Center for Science and Culture today announced that over 700 scientists from around the world have now signed a statement expressing their skepticism about the contemporary theory of Darwinian evolution." [179]  In addition, given that atheism is held in low esteem in many parts of the world and it is a minority position worldwide, Dawkins' refusal to debate strong theistic debaters is quite odd given his allegation that he doesn't debate creationists because he doesn't want to give them respectability and publicity. Furthermore, the Rabbi Boteach debate and the events surrounding it, shows the great lengths that Dawkins will go to avoid letting the public know about a debate loss to a  theist  (As mentioned previously Dawkins lost his video taped debate to Rabbi Boteach and then claimed the debate never took place). The reason why Dawkins refuses to debate creation scientists is that generally speaking,  creation scientists tend to win the creation vs. evolution debates .

Richard Dawkins is a writer and media commentator on the debate between evolution and the opposing positions of creation science and intelligent design. [180] [181]  He is an ardent proponent of the evolutionary view of life in works targeted at the general public, such as his books entitled  The Selfish Gene  and  The Ancestor's Tale . However, his efforts to promote the theory of evolution have not been very successful, and even in his native land of the UK, 40% of the population believes that creationism or intelligent design should be taught in the school science curriculum. [182]

As an evolutionist, Dawkins holds  Charles Darwin 's view that "the universe we observe has precisely the properties we should expect if there is, at bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil, no good, nothing but blind, pitiless indifference."  In addition, he often comes across as having a mocking attitude towards religion. [183]  He stridently [184]  opposes the traditional role of religion in educational institutions and in society in general. [185]  Dawkins has derided belief in  God  as a "mind-virus", [186]  which is infectious and harmful to society. In his 2006 book  The God Delusion , he states his belief that fundamentalist religion "subverts science and saps the intellect," a view that is contrary to the fact that many of the most productive scientists, from  Isaac Newton  to  Louis Pasteur , were devout Christians. The foundation of modern science  was largely established by those who held a Christian worldview . Dawkins often says that these men were rather a product of their time and, like many that came before them, lived in fear of persecution by Christians. There is no substantive evidence for this.
Dawkins also cites in his book, the God Delusion, that not one winner of the  Nobel Prize  for Science is a theist. While this has been openly debated, he cites his own personal relationships with many of these scientists.

Lord Robert Winston is a prominent scientist and British doctor who served as the President of the British Association for the Advancement of Science from 2004 to 2005. [187]  Currently, Lord Winston serves as Emeritus Professor of Fertility Studies at Imperial College in Britain. In 2006, Winston launched a broadside against Richard Dawkins and stated that he is bringing science "into disrepute" due to his refusal to "connect with spirituality". Winston also stated that Dawkins "sometimes doesn't seem to understand the limitations of science."

Alister McGrath , a Christian theologian who has a background in biophysics and is Professor of Historical Theology at Oxford University, wrote:

Atheist philosopher  Michael Ruse  echoes McGrath's estimation of  The God Delusion  and recently stated that the book makes him embarrassed to be an  atheist .

Professor McGrath asserts that the aggressive rhetoric of Dawkins' works is merely a mask to cover a deep insecurity about the public credibility of  atheism .
McGrath recently wrote a book opposing the  atheist  ideology of  Dawkins entitled  The Dawkins Delusion?: Atheist Fundamentalism and the Denial of the Divine . [188]

For more information please see:  Huxley Memorial Debate

The September 2005 issue of  Discover  magazine had an article on Richard Dawkins entitled "Darwin’s Rottweiler". [189]  The title is an allusion to Thomas Henry Huxley who became to be known as "Darwin's Bulldog". [190]  Huxley is arguably most well known for his debate with Bishop  Samuel Wilberforce  over the theory of evolution, and evolutionists and creationist dispute whether or not a key claimed event in the debate actually occurred. [191]  The  Discover  article stated the following:

The Simonyi Professorship Home Page promotes the idea that Richard Dawkins is "Darwin's Rottweiler" and has an article published in the Seattle newspaper  EastSideweek  which states the following:

Now given that Thomas Henry Huxley's is arguably most well known for his debate over the theory of evolution and given that Dawkins has stated he will no longer debate a  creation scientists  the title of "Darwin's Rottweiler" can certainly be disputed. Creationists wrote regarding Richard Dawkins current refusal to debate a creation scientist:

The aforementioned debate involving Richard Dawkins is fairly well known in creationist/intelligent design circles and the debate was tape recorded. [193]  In August 2003 the  Creation Research Society  published some interesting material about their correspondence with Richard Dawkins which focused on the debate. [178]  The Creation Research Society declared:

Richard Dawkins no longer will debate a creation scientist. Robert Sloan, Director of Paleontology at the University of Minnesota, reluctantly admitted to a  Wall Street Journal  reporter that the "creationists tend to win" the public debates which focused on the creation vs.  evolution  controversy. [194] 
In August 1979,  Dr. Henry Morris  reported in an  Institute for Creation Research  letter the following: “By now, practically every leading evolutionary scientist in this country has declined one or more invitations to a scientific debate on creation/evolution.”
Morris also said about the creation scientist  Duane Gish  (who had over 300 formal debates): “At least in our judgment and that of most in the audiences, he always wins.” Generally speaking, leading evolutionists generally no longer debate creation scientists. [195]

As noted earlier, it was agreed before the debate that discussion of religion was not to occur during the debate and that only the evidence related to the physical sciences were going to be discussed. At the end of the debate, Richard Dawkins started to give an impassioned plea to the audience to not give a single vote to the creationists which would show support for creationism. Mr. Dawkins was told to sit down by the President of the Oxford Union for violating the terms of the debate as far as not mentioning religion (as noted earlier John Maynard Smith also violated the terms of the debate). [178]

As mentioned earlier, Paul Humber notes there was a deception that occurred during email correspondence with Mr. Dawkins concerning the tally of vote counts that occurred for the Huxley Memorial Debate between creation scientists Professor A.E. Wilder-Smith and Professor Edgar Andrews and evolutionists Richard Dawkins and John Maynard Smith. [178]  Mr. Humber did not indicate whether Mr. Dawkins committed the deception or was merely duped by someone who provided an altered account. [178]

The  Brights Movement  was started in 2003 by Paul Geisert and Mynga Futrell in order to assist in the advocacy of a  naturalistic worldview . In October 2003 in a article in  the Guardian , Richard Dawkins associated being a "bright" with being an intellectual. [196]  Atheist  author  and columnist Christopher Hitchens expressed his "annoyance at Professor Dawkins and Daniel Dennett, for their cringe-making proposal that atheists should conceitedly nominate themselves to be called "brights". [197]   ABC   News.com commentator John Allen Paulos remarked of the Brights campaign, "I don't think a degree in  public relations  is needed to expect that many people will construe the term as smug, ridiculous, and arrogant" (Paulos 2003). [198]

Some in the academic community are critical of Richard Dawkins. One such example is Martin Rees, the Astronomer Royal and President of the  Royal Society . In a debate in May 2007 between Rees and Dawkins, Rees said that science needed as many friends as possible and that creating enemies within mainstream religion will make it "more difficult to combat the kinds of anti-science sentiments that are really important". He also argued that it will make it more difficult to fight terrorism. Richard Dawkins counter-argued that being nice to bishops helps to foster the view that faith is virtuous and can excuse any act on its behalf. Rees continued to argue that religion has no  monopoly  on being unreasonable citing examples of scientific sects such as the  Raelians  or extreme eco-groups as being as dangerous as religious fundamentalists. [199]

Among theologians there are many critics of Richard Dawkins, a notable example being Alister McGrath as noted earlier. Alister McGrath is Professor of Historical Theology at the University of Oxford. He has accused Dawkins of being ignorant of theology and has written a book challenging Dawkins' anti-religious stance,  The Dawkins Delusion . Even among biology colleagues, there are critics. While Ken Miller, a biology professor, doesn't challenge Dawkins' views on evolution, he does take issue with his insistence that religion and science are incompatible. [200]

Richard Dawkins, for his part, claims bafflement that some scientists he respects are capable of religious faith. [201] [202]

American   philosopher  Dr. Dallas Willard wrote concerning  The Blind Watchmaker  by Richard Dawkins:

Dr.  Jonathan Sarfati  offered several criticisms of the book  The Blind Watchmaker  by Richard Dawkins and states in his summary that the "...Apostle of  Atheism  has a long way to go to make a convincing case for his faith." [204]

Dawkins has written eleven books: nine have been on evolution and evolutionary theory, another is his  New York Times  bestselling  atheist  polemic  The God Delusion , and most recently, he has written a book for children introducing them to his way of thinking.

The first of his books,  The Selfish Gene , was published in 1976, and won him international acclaim. It has sold over one million copies and has been translated into 25 languages.

His books are:

Anti-evolution books specifically addressing Richard Dawkins:

Video:

Collection of rebuttals:

Reviews of Richard Dawkins' works:

From a Frog to a Prince video :

Richard Dawkins administered websites and web pages: