Richard Milhous Nixon  was the 37th  President of the United States of America , serving from 1969 to 1974. He was the only U.S. President to resign the office.  He also served as the 36th  Vice President of the United States  of America under President  Dwight D. Eisenhower  from 1953 to 1961.

In 1946, he was elected as a  U.S. Representative . As a Congressman from  California , and as a member of the  House Committee on Un-American Activities , he investigated  Communists  and instigated the successful prosecution of  Alger Hiss  for spying for the Soviet Union during  World War II .

After two terms in the House, he was elected to the U.S. Senate in November 1950. After losing his first presidential race to  John F. Kennedy  by a narrow margin in 1960, he unsuccessfully ran for Governor of California in 1962, losing to incumbent Edmund G Brown.

In 1968 he was elected president, and was reelected in 1972 by a landslide, but resigned the presidency on August 9, 1974 due to a threat of impeachment by Congress for the  Watergate Affair . The main impeachment charge was that Nixon obstructed justice by telling employees to mislead FBI investigators about the Watergate burglary.

Richard Milhous Nixon was born in  Yorba Linda, California , on January 9, 1913. Soon after, his family moved to Whittier, California. Nixon's childhood years were not unusual for someone growing up in two small towns near Los Angeles. His parents, Frank and Hannah Nixon, were devout  Quakers .  Nixon had four siblings and saw two of his brothers die from  tuberculosis . Nixon grew up relatively poor, as his father earned a modest income from his gas station and grocery store. Due to these hard times, he established a quality of determination and strong work ethic. A good student and a hard worker, Nixon excelled scholastically.

Nixon attended Fullerton High School and Whittier High School. He graduated second in his class from Whittier with honor in the study of  Shakespeare  and  Latin . He was awarded scholarships to  Harvard  and  Yale  University, but declined due to his family's financial condition. He instead enrolled at  Whittier College , a local  Quaker  school, where he co-founded the "Orthogonian Society", a new organization to the campus geared towards working-class students. At Whittier, Nixon, a formidable debater, was elected freshman class president, and served as student body vice president in his junior year and president in his senior year. While at Whittier, he taught Sunday school at  East Whittier Friends Church  and remained a member all his life.

A lifelong football fan, Nixon practiced with the team, but played little. In 1934, he graduated second in his class from Whittier, and went on to  Duke University School of Law , where he received a full scholarship, was elected president of the Duke Bar Association, and graduated third in his class. In 1942 Nixon became a lawyer for the  Office of Price Administration , the wartime liberal  New Deal  program that regulated all prices and rationed basic commodities.

During World War II, Nixon served in the  Navy  as a reserve officer, serving in the supply corps on several islands in the South Pacific, commanding cargo handling units in the SCAT. There he was known as "Nick" and for his exceptional poker-playing skills, banking a large sum of money that helped finance his first campaign for Congress. He rose to the rank of lieutenant commander and resigned after the war in March, 1946.

After service in the Navy he entered an entirely unstructured California political environment—parties hardly existed there in the 1940s, and many voters were recent arrivals. As a result, Nixon never built a secure base in California (or anywhere else). In 1946 he defeated five-term Democrat Representative Jerry Voorhis, a leading liberal. Two years later, Nixon ran for reelection in both the Republican and Democrat primaries and won endorsement of both parties in the general election. [1]  Nixon took typical positions for a California Republican: he was hostile to  Communism , internationalist in outlook, and  middle-of-the road in economic and social issues.

Nixon's first major breakthrough in the national limelight came in 1948 after an illegal break-in, misuse of the  FBI  and intelligence agencies, domestic spying and violations of civil rights, a cover-up, Congressional investigations, and a claim of Executive Privilege by  President Truman . [2]  The scandal began when the  OSS  and  FBI  illegally broke into the offices of  Amerasia  magazine, arrested 6 co-conspirators on theft of classified documents and espionage charges. [3]  The Truman administration covered up the illegal break-in, stonewalled the ensuing investigations, and ultimately claimed Executive Privilege in response to a Congressional subpoena. [4]

In 1950 Nixon was elected to the  United States Senate  by defeating a leading Hollywood liberal,  Helen Gahagan Douglas using tough campaign tactics that emphasized her votes with the far left.

Because of his membership of the California delegation at the 1952  Republican National Convention , his strong anti- communist  credentials, and his appeal to the  western  part of the  United States , Nixon was named as  General   Dwight Eisenhower 's  vice presidential   running mate .

In the midst of the campaign questions arose about a group of seventy-six  businessman  from southern California who had contributed to a secret slush fund for Richard Nixon, being paid $900 a month (totaling $18,168 up to that point). There was talk of Nixon dropping from the ticket. Nixon claimed that money was used for office expenses only. On September 23, 1952 he gave the now infamous "Checkers Speech" in which he said that he and his wife,  Pat Nixon  do not live lavishly, saying that his wife had not even owned a fur coat but only "a respectable Republican cloth coat". He went on to bring up a gift someone gave his  children , a "little cocker spaniel  dog " named Checkers, and said defiantly, "regardless of what they about it, we're going to keep it." The speech was meet with overwhelming public approval. In November, Eisenhower and Nixon swept their way in office, winning 55 percent of the vote, to 44 percent for Democrat opponent  Adlai Stevenson .

As Vice President Richard Nixon occasionally presided over the Senate and chaired the President's Commission on  Government  Contracts, which dealt with racial and religious discrimination by government contractors, and the Cabinet Committee on Price Stability for Economic growth (although Nixon had little influence over it). Nixon also chaired the  National Security Council . However, in a  press  conference President Eisenhower was asked to give an example of Richard Nixon's contributions as Vice President, to which Eisenhower replied, "If you give me a week, I might think of one."

Nixon did have an influential role in  White House  political operations. He campaigned for Republican members of Congress in 1954 and 1958. Nixon positioned himself as Presidential and his famous 1959 "Kitchen debate" in  Moscow  with  Soviet Union  President  Nikita Khrushchev  boosted his public appeal. By the end of the Eisenhower administration Nixon had become the top contender to be the Republican nomination for the 1960 Presidential election.

For a more detailed treatment, see  United States presidential election, 1960 .

Nixon easily won the Republican nomination for the presidency, but ran a poor campaign in the general election. Despite division over the modern  civil rights  movement, the country was enjoying a period of relative prosperity.

The most prominent issues were the  Cold War  and the new assumption of power of  dictator   Fidel Castro  of  Cuba . Public opinion polls showed that the country trusted Nixon more on  foreign policy  issues while Democrat opponent  John F. Kennedy  was favored on domestic issues. 1960 marked the first presidential election in which televised debates were used. Kennedy won the debates, which resulted in him defeating Nixon by a razor-thin margin of 49.7 percent of the vote to 49.5 percent. Nixon believed that there was voter fraud in Cook County,  Illinois  which resulted in him losing that state, however Nixon chose not to contest the results. Kennedy's lead in the electoral college was such that he still would have been elected even if he had lost Illinois.

After the election Nixon returned to California and ran for  Governor  in 1962 against incumbent  Pat Brown . Brown defeated Nixon with 52 percent of the vote to 46 percent. In a post-election press conference Nixon announced the end of his political career and said to the press "you won't have Richard Nixon to kick around with anymore." However, Nixon continued to campaign for Republican congressional candidates and traveled the world, sharpening his knowledge of foreign issues.

After  President Lyndon Johnson 's 1964 landslide election, Nixon paid Johnson a visit to the  Oval Office . The two had been old friends from the Senate where Johnson served as Majority Leader and Nixon the presiding officer. Both had eyed the presidency but Johnson got there first. Johnson asked Nixon what he was going to do now that he was a two-time loser; given his unemployment, Nixon was unsure. Johnson suggested he donate his vice-presidential papers to the National Archives and take a large charitable tax deduction which Johnson had done with his Senate and vice presidential papers. The top rate for income earners was 70% at this time and a large deduction would produce some income to start over with again. The papers of federal office holders then were considered the personal property of the office holder and it was a legal tax deduction.

For a more detailed treatment, see  United States presidential election, 1968 .

By 1967 Nixon's financial backers were raising funds to bankroll another bid for the White House. In the Republican primaries and caucuses moderates and liberals supported  Michigan  Governor  George Romney  and later  New York  Governor  Nelson Rockefeller , while  conservatives  supported  California  Governor  Ronald Reagan . Nixon was able to win support from southern conservatives and pass Reagan in the polls, eventually winning the nomination. In Nixon's second attempt for the Presidency the United States was in the midst of the  Vietnam War , with Democrats associated with the violence. With President  Lyndon Johnson  losing  credibility  because of the increasingly unpopular  war , he declined to run for another term.  Vice President   Hubert Humphrey  narrowly won the Democrat nomination.  Alabama  Governor  George Wallace , a strong segregationist, entered the race as a third party candidate. Nixon promised to end the bombing in  Vietnam , unify the nation and restore law and order to the country.

President Johnson helped Humphrey after he announced that bombing in North Vietnam would be halted and that a cease-fire would follow, however his announcement was too late. On election day, Nixon defeated Humphrey by over 100 electoral votes, although he won the election with only 43 percent of the vote to 42 percent, partly because Wallace took 13 percent.

For a more detailed treatment, see  United States presidential election, 1972 .

President Nixon's reelection campaign got underway in 1972. He had high approval ratings for his handling China and the Soviet Union. Nixon's Democrat opponent,  South Dakota  Senator  George McGovern  was viewed too  liberal  by many Americans. However, there was still concern in the Nixon camp because of his close victory in 1968 and the continued involvement in the Vietnam War. He chose to engage in tactics that included an effort to steal information in the Democrat Party's headquarters. Five Nixon supporters broke into the party's office at the Watergate complex in  Washington, D.C.  on June 17, 1972. However, this did not become an issue in the campaign, with President Nixon trumping McGovern in 49 out of 50 states.

On April 30, 1970, ten days after announcing that 150,000 American troops would be withdrawn from Vietnam in the following year, Nixon announced that U.S. troops had invaded Cambodia.  This announcement brought widespread protests and violence at college and university campuses across the nation.  Four students died at  Kent State University  in Ohio and two died at  Jackson State University  in Mississippi.  Many campuses shut down, some for the remainder of the academic year.  The  Paris Peace Accords  were signed on January 27, 1973, signaling the beginning of the peace process that ended with the evacuation of the last American personnel two years later on April 30, 1975.

After a long series of highly secret negations between Kissinger and Chinese leaders, Nixon announced that he would visit China in February 1972. During the historic trip, the leaders of both nations agreed to have a more normal relationship. Nixon told the Chinese during a banquet toast, "Let us start a long march together, not in lockstep, but on different roads leading to the same goal, the goal of building world structure of peace and justice." In taking the trip, Nixon hoped to both strengthen ties with China but also believed it would encourage the Soviet Union to be more diplomatic. He proved to be correct.

Shortly after the public learned about China, the Soviets proposed an American-Soviet summit, a high-level diplomatic meeting that was held in May 1972. President Nixon flew to Moscow for a week-long summit, thus becoming the first American President since  World War 2  to visit the Soviet Union. The two superpowers signed the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, or SALT 1, a plan to limit nuclear arms that the two nations had been working on for years. Nixon and Soviet President  Leonid Brezhnev  also agreed to increase trade and exchange scientific information. President Nixon had made a significant mark on the world stage with major foreign policy triumphs.

Although Nixon was a member of the  Republican Party , he had many  liberal  positions. In his tenure he enacted the  Environmental Protection Agency  (EPA) and the  Occupational Safety and Health Act . Nixon also fought " Global warming ". [5]

Nixon's enemies went back 20 years and consisted of many individuals and  partisans  who were outraged that a Congressional back-bencher disgraced an  FDR  protégé, a principal author of the  United Nations  Charter, and its first Secretary General. [6]   Alger Hiss  was an obvious choice to carry on the New Deal tradition in the post- World War II  era, but Nixon won a successful prosecution against him that landed Hiss in prison. [7]  From there, Nixon got himself elected Senator, Vice President, and eventually President.

Watergate was a vendetta among  leftists  for Nixon tarnishing the reputation of a celebrated New Dealer to advance his own career. [8]  The irony of Nixon's downfall however must not be overlooked: Nixon was attempting to cover up the mistakes of the two previous Democratic administrations. [9]   The leak of the  Pentagon Papers  largely pertained to decisions made during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations; Nixon avoided blame. [10]   Nixon was old school - he did not see the leak of classified government secrets in partisan terms of Democrats vs Republicans, but rather American interests vs anti-American interests.  Once again, as in the  Amerasia  and Hiss cases, the theft of government secrets and classified documents by  extreme  leftists was something Nixon was all too familiar with. [11]  FBI Director  J. Edgar Hoover  was reluctant to act, based upon Hoover's own experience in the foregoing cases. [12]  So Nixon authorized the creation of a secret, non-governmental "Plumbers unit" to fix government leaks. The outfit was funded by his 1972 re-election committee.

But Nixon's enemies were ready to pounce based on any scintilla of evidence of wrongdoing. It began before he took office, during the transition when Nixon deeded over a portion of his vice-presidential papers to the National Archives to qualify for a charitable tax deduction. The remainder would be deeded over later to offset future income. [13]  Since the time of  George Washington  it was customary to allow presidents to treat their papers as their own personal property, [14]  but midway through his first year Congress eliminated the deduction for the gift of papers completely and established a retroactive cutoff date. [15]  Nixon aides backdated some documents to make it appear the donations of the remaining papers had taken place before the cutoff date. [16]

Several times throughout Nixon's presidency he voluntarily requested the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) to examine his affairs. Nixon invested his $576,000 tax refund in real estate, properties that became known as the "Florida White House" and the "Western White House" in San Clemente, California. But Nixon's enemies still couldn't attach the aura of scandal in the public's eyes until after the 1972 election. Nixon won re-election, carrying a full one-third of all Democratic voters with him in his  Silent Majority  coalition. [17]

Amidst the charges that Nixon illegally misused the  IRS  to harass enemies, the IRS promptly turned around and audited a sitting president to display its independence. [18]  Nixon's $576,000 deduction - nearly three times his annual salary - meant he paid virtually no taxes for several years. The IRS found nothing wrong and gave him a clean bill of health, but the press implied Nixon was unscrupulous. This is when Nixon made his famous remark in a press conference with 400  Associated Press  managing editors:

As is readily apparent, Nixon's statement had nothing to do whatsoever with the Watergate burglary. But it was raw meat for a  biased ,  liberal  media to impugn Nixon and somehow make the connection in the public's mind, which til now had difficulty understanding what, if anything, Nixon did wrong in either Watergate or his tax troubles. To this day, "scholars" and "reputable journalists" still attempt to link the context of Nixon's remarks to Watergate.

The IRS re-opened the audit. Nixon again asked the JCT to look into the matter. By then, the notorious  segregationist  Sen. Sam Ervin was becoming an afternoon television matinee idol of the left with his Senate Watergate Hearings.

The event that finally ended the Nixon presidency began on June 17, 1972, when five men, all employees of Nixon's reelection campaign, were caught breaking into rival Democratic headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington, DC. The intruders and two other accomplices were convicted of burglary and wiretapping in Jan. 1973. The  Watergate affair  ultimately caused Nixon to resign on August 9, 1974. On September 9, 1974, his successor Gerald Ford granted him "a full, free, and absolute pardon."  This effectively ended investigation into the depth of Nixon's involvement in the break-in at  Democratic National Committee  headquarters in the Watergate hotel, or any other criminal activities. Former White House Counsel John Dean testified to a Congressional investigating committee of Nixon's involvement in the cover-up.

The FBI was seeking to apprehend  Bernadine Dohrn  and  William Ayers  after they bombed the  Pentagon  and the  United States Capitol . [24]  Deputy FBI Director  Mark Felt , who became a turncoat known as "Deepthroat", authorized an illegal break-in of Dohrn's sisters' apartment, Jennifer Dohrn, seeking information on the fugitives whereabouts. [25]  Ayers and Dohrn, who were never prosecuted, years later groomed and  mentored future President  Barack Hussein Obama .

The president, citing  Executive Privilege , refused to turn the tapes over to the committee.  In October 1973 Nixon ordered Elliot Richardson, the attorney general, to fire Archibald Cox, the special prosecutor who had subpoenaed the tapes, but Richardson resigned in protest. Richardson's assistant, William Ruckelshaus, also refused to fire Cox and was fired by Nixon. Finally, Solicitor General Robert Bork fired Cox. The incident, which was trumped in the press as the "Saturday Night Massacre", led to widespread calls for Nixon's impeachment.

The White House released edited transcripts of the tapes in April 1974, and eventually the tapes themselves, after the Supreme Court rejected Nixon's claim to executive privilege. The House Judiciary Committee issued three  articles of impeachment  on July 30, 1974.

"In all of this," the articles of impeachment summarize, "Richard M. Nixon has acted in a manner contrary to his trust as President and subversive of constitutional government, to the great prejudice of the cause of law and justice, and to the manifest injury of the people of the United States." After conferring with Republican Senators Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974. Nixon was succeeded in office the same day by  Gerald Ford . Ford later pardoned Nixon.

The Nixon White House was also involved in  controversies in Latin America , which included  an alleged assassination attempt  in  Chile , among  other questionable activities .

Nixon married Thelma Catherine Ryan, known as "Pat", in 1940.  They had two children: Patricia (b. 1946) and Julie (b. 1948).

Mostly because of his involvement in the Watergate affair as well as his testifying against  Alger Hiss  during the McCarthy Era, Nixon has frequently been demonized by various liberals and members of the left-wing, many times even attributing any bad or unpopular stuff to him even when he had little if any involvement in them.

One example is claiming that Nixon had been behind the Watergate break-in, even though Nixon actually had no prior knowledge to or support of the break in at all.

Another example, generally given by the anti-war left, involved claiming that he had been responsible for American involvement in the Vietnam War as a form of American imperialism. This is ignoring that the Vietnam War actually had its roots with  John F. Kennedy  sending military advisors into Vietnam, and it was escalated under  Lyndon B. Johnson 's watch. Nixon was elected to end a "Democrat war", which he did.