On August 25, 2011, the  United States Office of Special Counsel  ( OSC ) filed a motion declaring former TSA Federal Air Marshal  Robert MacLean  a whistleblower. [1]

In her August 25, 2011 motion, U.S. Special Counsel Carolyn Lerner of the  United States Office of Special Counsel  (MSPB) filed an amicus curiae with the United States Merit Systems Protection Board in support of Robert MacLean. It requested that the MSPB reverse its June 22, 2009 [2]  and July 25, 2011 [3]  decisions.

U.S. Special Counsel Lerner wrote:

. . .

No specific statute exists that would allow the TSA to negate [Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 (CSRA)] whistleblower protections. The statute that the TSA relied upon to  retroactively designate MacLean's protected disclosure  as SSl does not establish particular criteria for withholding and does not refer to particular types of matters to be withheld

. . .

On August 25, 2011, the  United States Office of Special Counsel  ( OSC ) declared former  Transportation Security Administration  (TSA) Federal Air Marshal Robert MacLean a whistleblower. [5]

Two days after the  Department of Homeland Security  issued a July 26, 2003  al-Qaeda  suicidal hijacking warning [6]  for cross-Atlantic U.S. flights, MacLean made a disclosure exposing the TSA's cost-cutting plan that would have specifically violated federal law 49 USC § 44917(b). Eleven members of the  108th United States Congress  publicly supported MacLean's actions that led to the TSA canceling its plans. Over three years after the fact, the TSA backdated MacLean's 2003 whistleblower disclosure with a TSA-regulated unclassified information marking. The TSA applied its marking and then charged MacLean for violating it after investigating him for appearing in a 2004  September 11, 2001 attacks  anniversary national television news special regarding the TSA's failure to protect the identities of Federal Air Marshals. A year before MacLean's July 2003 disclosure, the TSA implemented dress code, airport security checkpoint bypass, and pre-boarding policies which routinely exposed Federal Air Marshal identities. [7]

On July 25, 2011, the  United States Merit Systems Protection Board  (MSPB) ― an  Executive (government)  branch panel currently made up of one  George W. Bush  and two  Barack Obama  appointees limited to a 5 or 7-year term ― defended the TSA's actions of backdating MacLean's 2003 disclosure with its unclassified marking regulations. This board ruled that a 1979  Supreme Court of the United States  decision, Chrysler Corp. v. Brown, [8]  cancels out MacLean's  Whistleblower Protection Act  of 1989 defenses. MacLean has filed a Petition For Review of this executive branch decision to the  United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit .

Robert MacLean was a U.S.  Transportation Security Administration   Federal Air Marshal Service  air marshal. [9]  He was fired on April 11, 2006 for making a disclosure that protected aviation and national security. [10]

After a year went by that the U.S.  Transportation Security Administration 's (TSA) dress code [11]  and boarding procedures [12]  were routinely exposing the identities of U.S. Federal Air Marshals, and two days after a terrorist suicide hijacking plot was discovered by U.S. and foreign intelligence agencies in the summer of 2003, the TSA formulated an operational plan to remove air marshals from nonstop, long distance flights—the type of flight used for the  September 11 attacks  in 2001.  TSA formulated the plan after facing a budget shortfall; the purpose was to cut the costs due to air marshals having to lodge overnight at hotels after a full duty day of long distance missions traveling away from their duty stations.  Air marshals would have been absent from nonstop long-distance flights for the two months until the new federal Fiscal Year 2004.  Immediately after congressional outrage the day after MacLean's disclosure, the plan was rescinded: air marshal coverage of long haul flights was not changed.

In July 2003, U.S. Federal Air Marshal (FAM) Robert MacLean tried to blow the whistle within the TSA on a plan to reduce air marshal coverage of nonstop, long distance flights amidst heightened warnings  [13]  based on a July 26, 2006  Department of Homeland Security  (DHS) Advisory describing intelligence of an  al-Qaeda  suicide hijack plan. [14]  
The plan would exploit a U.S. immigration loophole enabling a terrorist, without a U.S. visa, to take a flight from a country with less-stringent security to a U.S. airport and roam that U.S. airport during a layover before taking a second connecting flight to the destination country.  Once inside a U.S. airport, terrorists would smuggle weapons onto aircraft by hiding weapons inside camera equipment and children's toys.  During flight, the terrorists with the smuggled weapons would overpower the crew, take control, and fly the hijacked aircraft into U.S. east coast targets. [15]   The plan was in direct violation of the Aviation & Transportation Security Act (Public Law 107–71), Title 49 of the  United States Code  Section 44917:  “Deployment of Federal Air Marshals... [on] nonstop, long distance flights, such as those targeted on September 11, 2001, should be a priority.” [16]

MacLean was rebuffed by his FAMS managers and the  Department of Homeland Security Office of Inspector General  (DHS/OIG), so he warned the public by going to the press. [17]   The message he disclosed was not labeled as UNclassified "Sensitive Security Information" (SSI), the often abused information control label within DHS' Transportation Security Administration (TSA) used to protect information—unaware of any obligation to protect the information.  For employees dealing with traditional classified information, which is typically much more sensitive that SSI, they must be made aware of its status so as to protect it accordingly.

MacLean's disclosure helped to draw public scrutiny and congressional outrage to TSA's ill-conceived plan which rapidly led to them reversing their plan. [18]   TSA first denied that air marshals would have been shifted, but the morning after MacLean's disclosure, Senators  Hillary Clinton ,  Barbara Boxer , and  Charles Schumer  held press conferences condemning the plan forcing the TSA to backpedal. [19]   Later that day the TSA acknowledged that schedules had been changed and their spokesman, Robert Johnson, stated in a press conference,  "Those actions were premature and a mistake by the people who were involved." [20]

U.S. Senator  Hillary Rodham Clinton  from New York, now Secretary of State, wrote a letter to DHS Secretary  Tom Ridge  about MacLean's disclosure:

Congressman Hal Rogers (Republican) of Kentucky told Fox News:

U.S. Senator  Barbara Boxer  from California wrote this provision into ATSA. [23] [24] [25]   Senator Boxer also called for better protection of the identities of Federal Air Marshals and greater oversight of the Federal Air Marshal Service. [26]

FAM Robert MacLean was rebuffed by his TSA managers and a  Department of Homeland Security Office of Inspector General  (DHS/OIG) field agent, so he warned the public by going to NBC News. MacLean was quoted, anonymously, along with other unnamed sources, in a story written by Brock N. Meeks, Chief Washington correspondent for MSNBC.com. [27]  That article broke the story and set off a chain reaction among national media outlets resulting in dozens of articles and televised broadcasts. [28]   The message MacLean disclosed was not marked as Sensitive Security Information (SSI), the often abused UNclassified information control mark used to protect information within the DHS's Transportation Security Administration (TSA). [29]  Given that text message was sent nationally to all FAMS employees' unencrypted and password-protected cellular phones and did not contain SSI marking, MacLean was unaware of any obligation to protect the information.  For employees dealing with traditional CLASSIFIED Information, which is typically much more sensitive that SSI, they must be made aware of its status so as to protect it accordingly.

FAM Robert MacLean's disclosure helped draw public scrutiny and bipartisan congressional outrage [30]  to TSA's plan which rapidly led to its reversal. [31]   TSA first denied that air marshals would have been shifted, but the morning after MacLean's disclosure, U.S. Senators  Hillary Rodham Clinton  (New York),  Barbara Boxer  (California), and  Charles Schumer  (New York) [32]  held video press conferences condemning the plan forcing the TSA to reverse its plan before going into effect. [33]

U.S. Senator  Frank Lautenberg  of New Jersey was "furious" and issued this July 30, 2003 press release:

U.S. Senator  Charles Schumer  of New York stated the following:

U.S. Senator Charles Schumer of New York also called on DHS Secretary Ridge to:

Fearful that fewer air marshals might travel on cross-country flights into San Francisco, Senator Boxer told reporter Edward Epstein of the  San Francisco Chronicle  that she had offered to send the TSA a list of hotels near San Francisco International Airport where air marshals could book rooms for well under $100 a night.  In a discussion with Senator Schumer, DHS Assistant Secretary of Border & Transportation Asa Hutchinson also admitted the plan to remove air marshals from nonstop, long distance flights was an error:

U.S. Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts told the Wall Street Journal that President Bush's tax cuts for the wealthy caused the TSA to consider implementing the plan:

Congresswoman Carolyn B. Maloney of New York issued a press release on her official congressional website:

Congressmen Bill Pascrell, Jim Turner, and James Langevin together issued press releases about their letter to DHS Secretary  Tom Ridge :

Congressman Bill Pascrell:

Congressman James Langevin:

U.S. Senator Ernest Hollings of South Carolina:

From the House floor, U.S. Congressmen Ken Calvert introduced a favorable news article into the Congressional Record: