Rolando "Tigre" Masferrer Rojas  was a very complex person.  One of his grand nephews. Marc Masferrer, writes:

"... my great-uncle Rolando Masferrer.(:) Lawyer. Poet. Journalist. Communist Party member. Spanish Civil War veteran. Expelled Communist Party member. Enemy of  Fidel Castro . Senator. Fighter. That’s him.  I’m sure some, including the folks in charge in Havana, have a few other choice ways to describe Rolando.  Thief. Gangster. Murderer. ..."  [1]

Masferrer, after he was wounded in battle during the  Spanish Civil War , became an famous assassin in Spain. [2]  He was brave, ruthless, and corrupt. [3]  It was said that his victims last memories were hearing a lame man following them dragging his feet.  After he came back from Spain he made a public break with the Cuban communist party at a meeting at the Soviet Embassy in Havana while talking to  Ernest Hemingway .  Fabio Grobart  -- Joseph Stalin 's man in Havana—tried to get him to rejoin the communist party, but who could trust Grobart, who is widely believed linked to a number of murders of defectors such as  Julio Antonio Mella  and left wing rivals such as  Sandalio Junco .  Masferrer participated in the "student" action group struggles that destabilized  Cuba  in the democratic Autentico Years, on one occasion after Fidel Castro, who then belonged to a different action group, [4]  tried to kill him he remarked in words to the effect that he recognized Castro by his rapidly retreating fat posterior. In 1947 he participated in the massive, but frustrated attempt by the  Caribbean Legion  to overthrow  Rafael L. Trujillo , the Dictator of the  Dominican Republic . After the March 10th 1952 Batista coup, he first thought to fight  Fulgencio Batista , then decided to join him.  He developed a murderous repressive force "Los Tigres de Masferrer," and yet he was not right wing for his instance his plan to suppress the guerrillas of  Fidel Castro  was to buy the huge Sevilla Hacienda in the heights of the  Sierra Maestra  mountains and divide up among the local montunos so as to give a base to resist the Castro Forces.

After Masferrer fled Cuba in January 1959, he made several attempts to overthrow Castro. These attempts failed because his misdeeds plus virulent pro-Castro propaganda had left him with the most unsavory of reputations.  In Halloween 1975 he was blown up in Miami. As usual in these cases it is not known precisely who did it, some say it was disgruntled criminal rivals, although it is common and most logical to blame Castro. [5]

Adaptations of the Masferrer's persona are also found in the literature  [6]