Salem Web Network 
represents the largest faith-based audiences on the Internet and is headquartered in  Richmond, Virginia  with offices in  Dallas   and  Nashville . Salem Web Network is owned and operated by  Salem Communications Salem Corp. and the goal of the Web Network is to "replicate Salem's leadership position in radio in the digital world". According to Nielsen Net Ratings, Salem Web Network has more pages viewed by than all other web sites combined in the niche. The Network claims over 100 million page views per month and over 3 million e-mail subscribers. [1]

Salem Web Network began with the acquisition of  OnePlace.com  and [SermonSearch.com]. At that time, they were receiving 78,000 page views, had a revenue of 3 million and a profit of -6.1 million. Today, Salem Web Network reaches more than 6 million unique users each month with over 60 million+ page views, has a revenue of 10 million and a profit of 2 million. [2]

Salem Web Network owns over 12 national sites and 60 local websites for Salem radio stations. Bible study tools, devotionals, music and ministry streaming, conservative news and commentary, Christian E-cards and more can be found on Salem's sites. [3]

Crosswalk.com  was acquired in 2002 and "aims to offer the freshest and most compelling biblically-based content to Christians who take seriously their relationship with Christ."  Crosswalk.com  is built around four primary content areas – Faith, Family, Fun and Community. Each category is further subdivided into areas of significance to many Christians, including Bible Study, Devotionals, Marriage, Parenting, Music, etc. The sites content and material is provided by ministries such as  Focus on the Family , Insight for Living from Chuck Swindoll, John Piper (theologian), John F. MacArthur, and many more. The site features Movie Reviews from a family friendly perspective, music and book reviews,  homeschooling   resources, a Christian directory, and other Christian interests.

The 2005 acquisition of   Christianity.com  was another important, strategic step for the Salem Web Network.  Christianity  provides additional content of interest to our audience, as well as a premier Web address. With links to the most trafficked Christian content on the Web, plus fun and informative Bible trivia, devotionals and more, Christianity.com is quickly becoming the home page of Christianity. The mission of Christianity.com is to "bring glory to God in all that we do, equip people to grow in their faith and practical application of it in their lives, enhancing fellowship, communication and relationship-building within the Christian community, encouraging and enabling personal involvement in the care of those who are spiritually, emotionally, physically or financially poor" [4]

Christianity.com  keeps a sound, theological tone by publishing content from today's top ministry leaders including  J. Vernon McGee , Adrian Rogers, John F. MacArthur,  Hank Hanegraaff , Greg Laurie, Max Lucado, Charles Stanley (evangelist),  Charles Spurgeon , and more. [5]

The new  Bible Study Tools  on Christianity.com includes over 30 Bible translations, popular commentaries, concordances, dictionaries, lexicons, apocrypha's, devotionals from reputable pastors, speakers, and authors. The program allows users to highlight and underline verses, create Bible reading plans, and take and save notes in the online "margins".

OnePlace.com  offers access to the ministry and teaching of more than 200 premium speakers, pastors and Bible experts in the nation, including Chuck Swindoll, David Jeremiah, Kay Arthur,  Hank Hanegraaff  and Greg Laurie. The site aims to equip Christians with effective tools for life and relationships grounded in faith principles through audio programming and podcast, Bible study tools, and one of the largest collections of daily devotionals online. Launched in 1998, it is one of the most trafficked Christian destinations on the Web, with 13 million page views and 1.3 million unique users per month. [6]

OnePlace.com received the 2007 National Religious Broadcasters Media Award for Internet-Best  Broadcasting  Website.

LightSource.com  is Salem Web Network's new Christian video portal. Today's most popular Christian leaders, authors, and speakers broadcast their sermons and messages on this streaming site. The site is completely free and you can also register for video podcasting. The site features John F. MacArthur, Greg Laurie, Jack Graham (pastor),  Joel Osteen , Adrian Rogers, Beth Moore, T.D. Jakes,  Joyce Meyer , and more. [7]

ChristianJobs.com  is a full-featured employment website focusing on employment within the Christian community. Their mission claims to provide a "quality service catering to the hiring needs of Christian-friendly companies and organizations while enabling job seekers to plug into that community." ChristianJobs.com has 241,617 registered members and 30,044 resumes in their database.  [8]  In addition to traditional features such as job postings and resume listings, the site also offers career tools including eCoaching and eMentoring as well as Business network.

ChurchStaffing.com  serves the  United States  and  Canada  as a website focused on connecting churches and ministries with great staff candidates. Users may post job openings, browse church and ministry opportunities, explore and shop the online resource store. ChurchStaffing.com allows job seekers to post their resumes so that churches and ministries can search the growing 13,000 resumes in the database. With over 3.5-million monthly pageviews and 800+ jobs, ChurchStaffing is a leader in this niche of the job market.  [9]   ChurchStaffing.com  has partnered with  Secure Search  to provide faith-based organizations with background checks for staff and volunteers. The site also has free sample job descriptions and a salary comparison database.

CrossDaily.com  is a large Christian graphics site with over 6.5-million monthly pageviews that allows members to browse over 25,000 images. [10]  The graphics section features photography,  video  loops, PowerPoint sets, wallpaper, Clip art, and web art. In addition to the graphics section  CrossDaily.com  features a large number of animated and static Christian Christian E-card. Another highly trafficked section of CrossDaily.com is free online Bible trivia games including  Bible Trivia Pro ,  Bible Ball ,  Bible Jeopardy ,  Saintly Millionaire , and more.  [11]

Crosscards.com  is a popular website with over 3.5-million pageviews a month. The site is designed to provide the online faith-based audience with e-greeting cards that offer unique messages of God's love, inspiration, encouragement, and fun. The site has e-cards for birthdays, care, thank-you, sorry, patriotic, scripture, wacky holidays, just for fun, and more. They also provide  mobile wallpaper  and  True Tones , cell phone ringtone featuring inspirational songs.

SermonSearch  was originally an independent website named  Ministers' Resource Center . In 1997,  OnePlace.com  purchased the site and renamed it  SermonSearch.com . The focus of the site became presentation of  Sermons  in text format, available for viewing and downloading.  SermonSearch  is a database-driven website containing over 17,000 sermons by well-known  Pastors  and speakers. "Used as a valuable research tool,  SermonSearch  sermons will stimulate new ideas within Christians, and help pastors customize their teachings to fulfill their congregation's needs." [12]  In addition to the sermon outlines, SermonSearch.com also features worship backgrounds, motion loops, and video clips that can be downloaded for a fee.