The  scientific revolution  was birthed in a Christianized Europe (see:  Christianity and science ). And devout Christians played a significant role in the scientific revolution. [2]

Strictly speaking, the existence of God is a  philosophical  question and not a  scientific  question since God is supernatural and thus outside of nature.

The majority of philosophers of religion, or those who have extensively studied the issue of the  existence of God , are  theists  (72 percent). [3]

According to a 2009 Pew Research poll of the members of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, "just over half of scientists (51%) believe in some form of deity or higher power; specifically, 33% of scientists say they believe in God, while 18% believe in a universal spirit or higher power." [4]

See also:   Atheism and health

NBC News reported: "In the survey of 1,044 doctors nationwide, 76 percent said they believe in God, 59 percent said they believe in some sort of afterlife, and 55 percent said their religious beliefs influence how they practice medicine." [6]

On the other hand, according to Livescience.com, 31 percent of  social scientists  believe in God. [7]   27 percent of  political scientists , who are social scientists, believe in the existence of God. [8]

Compared to  medical science  which has many effective medicines and surgical procedures, social science is often unreliable. For example, few economists (economics is a social science) in academia predicted the  Great Depression  or the 1987 financial crisis.  Ludwig von Mises  was snubbed by economists worldwide when he warned of a credit crisis in the 1920s. [9]   Few, if any, political scientists predicted early on that  Donald Trump  would be the leading Republican candidate in the 2016  GOP  primary.

The political scientist Emily Thorson wrote at the Politico website:

This is the question everyone seems to be asking these days. Trump’s rise has defied the predictions of pundits and pollsters, repeatedly embarrassing those who swore that he would flame out. I’m a political scientist, and I count myself among that number. In September, I offered my students a $500 bet that he wouldn’t become the Republican nominee — a wager I’m increasingly glad that none of them took me up on. [10]

In an article entitled  How reliable are the social sciences? , Cary Cutting wrote in the  New York Times :

See also:   Psychology

Psychology is a social science.

Among American college professors, psychology professors have the highest percentage of atheists (50% of American college professors are atheists). [12]

In 2014, the science journal  Nature  reported that over half of psychology studies fail reproducibility test. [13]

In 2011, the  New York Times  declared:

Theodore Beale  reported:

In addition to the 46 percent of psychologists who the  NHS  reports as being depressed, "out of 800 psychologists sampled, 29 per cent reported suicidal ideation and 4 per cent reported attempting suicide."...

Would you go to a plumber whose toilet is overflowing? Would you hire a computer programmer who didn't know how to use a computer? Then why would you ever talk to one of these nutjobs in order to fix whatever mental issues you might be having?...

There is very little scientific evidence of the benefits of psychology. I read one recent study which showed that neurotic individuals actually stabilize on their own at a higher rate than those who seek therapy. This is no surprise, as the foundations of psychology are literally fiction. [15]

See:  The atheist psychologist Sigmund Freud promoted pseudoscience

In the both the physical sciences and social sciences atheism has had a negative effect on science (see:  Atheism and science ).