Research indicates that  atheists  are widely distrusted - even among atheists themselves (see:  Distrust of atheists ).

The  new atheist   Sam Harris  said concerning the label of atheist, "It's right next to child molester as a designation." [1] [2]  See also:  Views on atheists

Psychology Today  reports about  social media :

Buzzfeed reported about social media and the social ostracism of atheists in Bengladesh:

Karen Garst wrote in her book  Women Beyond Belief: Discovering Life Without Religion : "...people stopped talking to me, and some even unfriended me on social media." [5]

Although atheists are unfriended at social media due to their atheism/ militant atheism , many also block others on social media. Politically, most atheists lean to the  left  politically (see:  Atheism and politics  and  Secular left . A Pew Research study found that “consistent  liberals ” were most likely to block others on  social media  for disagreeing with them politically. [6]

See also:   Atheism and happiness  and  Atheism and depression  and  Internet atheism

People generally want to socialize with happy people rather than those who have a general disposition of unhappiness.

CNN  reported about  atheism and happiness :

The conclusion: When they are limited to 140 characters or less, these researchers say, believers are happier than their counterparts.

Two doctoral students in social psychology and an adviser analyzed the casual language of nearly 2 million tweets from more than 16,000 active users to come up with their findings, which were published in Social Psychological and Personality Science.

The team identified subjects by finding Twitter users who followed the feeds of five prominent public figures. In the case of Christians, those select five were Pope Benedict XVI, Joel Osteen, Rick Warren, conservative political commentator Dinesh D’Souza and Joyce Meyer, an evangelical author and speaker.

In the case of atheists, the five followed feeds included  Richard Dawkins ,  Sam Harris ,  Christopher Hitchens , Monica Salcedo and Michael Shermer - the latter two respectively being a self-described “fiercely outspoken atheist” blogger, and a science writer who founded The Skeptics Society.

With the help of a text analysis program, the researchers found that Christians tweet with higher frequency words reflecting positive emotions, social relationships and an intuitive style of thinking – the sort that’s gut-driven. [8]

See also:   Richard Dawkins and social media

The  new atheist   Richard Dawkins  has had difficulty managing his  social media  presence which has caused him a considerable amount of negative publicity and loss of public influence (see:  Richard Dawkins' loss of influence ).

See also:   Elevatorgate

Dawkins' loss of a very large amount of his public influence was the result of his  Elevatorgate  controversy (see:  Richard Dawkins' loss of influence ). The Elevatorgate controversy involved  femninsts  and others being offended by his blog comments to a blog post and his subsequent commentary about the matter

See also:   Atheist movement  and  Atheist pessimism about the atheist movement

Richard Dawkins is still widely criticized for igniting deep fractures in the  atheist movement  through his Elevatorgate controversy. For example, on November 26, 2013, the atheist activist and blogger  Jen McCreight  posted at Twitter the message: "Did anyone on Dawkins AMA ask how he feels about singlehandedly destroying the  atheist movement  with the Dear Muslima yet?" [9]  In December 2013, atheist Jack Vance at Atheist Revolution called July 2, 2011, which is the day that Elevatorgate occurred, "The day the atheist movement died." [10]

See also:   Richard Dawkins and Twitter

Despite the medical advice of his doctors, Richard Dawkins had a very active Twitter presence before his minor stroke (with a number of Twitter controversies) and numerous public controversies. [11]

Dawkins has  accumulated over 30,000 Twitter tweets. [12]   The Independent  reported, "Dawkins also admitted he wasn't very good at managing Twitter and the strong reactions his posts tend to provoke. 'Twitter is very difficult medium to handle,' he said. 'I’m not much of a diplomat.'" [13]   However, after his stroke, in May 2016, Dawkins  gave up posting on Twitter and the tweets that appear in his name are done by his staff. [14]

See also:   Atheism and profanity  and  Richard Dawkins' battle with online fans  and  Atheism and the internet

In February 2010, the news organization  The Telegraph  reported Richard Dawkins was "embroiled in a bitter online battle over plans to rid his popular internet forum for atheists of foul language, insults and 'frivolous gossip'." [15]  Richard Dawkins  has a reputation for being abrasive  so the behavior of his fans is not entirely surprising. See:  Atheism and profanity

It is commonly  thought that some individuals who commonly use profanity have limited vocabularies and imaginations. [16] [17]

See also:   Atheism and social skills  and  Atheism and narcissism

The atheist  Michael Nugent  reported in 2015 about fellow atheist  PZ Myers :

PZ’s new view on community-building is that ‘we are all objects in space, drifting, occasionally bouncing off each other or tugging gently at each other’s masses. And that’s about it.’ PZ now says that he ‘will be a cold dark ember of a star, following my own whims, drifting alone, not trying to create a hospitable atmosphere.’

This shows that PZ Myers has learned nothing useful from the Little Shop of Hatred that he created and nourished until he lost control of it.  Yesterday I wrote that, while I welcomed PZ’s diminishing influence in the international  atheist movement , I would also welcome a genuine conversion by him to civility and empathy and fairness and justice. This has not happened. So be it. [18]

See also:   Atheism vs. Islam

A  Huffington Post  article entitled  In The Middle East Sharing Atheism on Social Media Ends Badly  declares:

After his name appeared on a list of atheists Al-Banna approached police from the northern Egyptian city Idku to file a harassment complaint. Al-Banna informed the police he was being harassed because he was an atheist. After all the Egyptian constitution “ostensibly guarantees freedom of belief,” according to Human Rights Watch.

Instead of protecting the 21-year-old college student the authorities decided to arrest him.

In Egypt “freedom of belief” is protected only to a degree. If you criticize  Islam  you can be prosecuted under religious contempt. Religious contempt is a very broad term, but essentially anything seen as blasphemous to Islamic teachings can be considered grounds for religious contempt. Espousing atheism on Facebook apparently counts. [19]