Socialized Medicine  is  health care  as supplied by a  monopolistic  or heavily  subsidized  and regulated  universal health care  State system.

Health care funding was the major political issue of 2009, with the Republicans in near-solid opposition and the Democrats divided. On 7 November 2009 the House passed its version, the "Affordable Health Care for America Act" (H.R. 3962). It would cost $1.1 trillion but now goes to the Senate where its fate is uncertain.

It just barely passed 215-210, as 39 Democrats deserted Speaker  Nancy Pelosi 's leadership; only one Republican voted yes.  Pelosi, a liberal, is a strong supporter of abortion but to get the 215 votes she had to give in to Catholic leaders nationally and abortion opponents in her own caucus and allow passage of the  Stupak Amendment . The amendment imposes tight restrictions that bar any insurance plan that is purchased with government subsidies from covering abortions.  As a result, numerous liberals denounced the bill even as they voted for it. [1]

The White House Council of Economic Advisers issued a report in June 2009 explaining the  Obama administration 's goal of reducing projected health spending by 30% over the next two decades. That reduction would be achieved by eliminating "high cost, low-value treatments," by "implementing a set of performance measures that all providers would adopt," and by "directly targeting individual providers . . . (and other) high-end outliers."

Obama emphasized the importance of limiting services to "health care that works." To identify such care, he provided more than $1 billion in the  American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009  to jump-start Comparative Effectiveness Research (CER) and to finance a federal CER advisory council. Comparative effectiveness would become the vehicle for deciding whether each method of treatment provides enough of an improvement in health care to justify cost.  The existence of such a program in the U.S. similar the British NHS's Quality Adjusted Life Year (QALY) would not only deny lifesaving care but would also cast a pall over medical researchers who would fear that government experts might reject their discoveries as "too expensive." [2]

If an individual fails to purchase coverage and does not meet the exceptions or the religious exemption, then a financial penalty will be assessed. Under this particular proposal for  Obamacare  care, the penalty is calculated by multiplying the number of uncovered months times the weighted average of the monthly premium for a plan in the person’s coverage class and coverage area, plus 15 percent. [3]

In 1961,(while still a democrat)  Ronald Reagan  took part in  Operation Coffee Cup  and in part here is what he said:  [1] :

The doctor begins to lose freedom. . . . First you decide that the doctor can have so many patients. They are equally divided among the various doctors by the government. But then doctors aren’t equally divided geographically. So a doctor decides he wants to practice in one town and the government has to say to him, you can't live in that town. They already have enough doctors. You have to go someplace else. And from here it's only a short step to dictating where he will go. . . . All of us can see what happens once you establish the precedent that the government can determine a man's working place and his working methods, determine his employment. From here it's a short step to all the rest of socialism, to determining his pay. And pretty soon your son won't decide, when he's in school, where he will go or what he will do for a living. He will wait for the government to tell him where he will go to work and what he will do.