Stanley David Levison  was a secret member of the  Communist Party USA , in charge of handling the party's finances and its “reserve fund,” while the party was secretly funded by the Kremlin. [1]  He was also a top adviser to the Reverend Dr.  Martin Luther King .

The FBI first learned of Levison's secret activities on behalf of the CPUSA in 1952, when brothers Jack and Morris Childs—two Communist Party functionaries who had been close to Levison since the 1940s—became FBI informants. [2]

In 1956, King's personal assistant, the socialist (and ex-Communist)  Bayard Rustin , introduced King to Levison, who quickly became King's "most influential white counselor." On January 10, 1957, King founded the  Southern Christian Leadership Conference  (SCLC); six months later, an FBI memo reported that a redacted source—either Jack or Morris Childs -- "stated that Stanley Levison is now a CP member with no official title, who performs his CP work through mass organization activity." [3]   But the FBI still hadn't made the link: In September, Hoover instructed agents regarding the SCLC, “In the absence of any indication that the Communist Party has attempted, or is attempting, to infiltrate this organization, you should conduct no investigation in this matter.” [4]

In 1958, James Jackson, Communist Party Secretary in charge of “Negro and Southern Affairs” said that he and Communist Party General Secretary  Eugene Dennis  had conferred with “the most secret and guarded people, who are in touch with, consulting with, and guiding [Martin] Luther King,” according to Jack Childs. These were “party guys, far removed from the top but [who were] playing an important role in guiding these fellows [King and associates].” Jackson thought that “this group may be important in Negro work.” On May 6, 1960, Childs reported:

During this period, the FBI discovered that Levison was in frequent contact with KGB agent Victor Lessiovsky, [6]  who was in New York under cover as special assistant to United Nations Secretary General U Thant. Lessiovsky specialized in recruiting “third world peoples” as Soviet assets [7]

On January 8, 1962, FBI Director  J. Edgar Hoover  informed Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy that Levison was both "a close adviser" to Dr. King and "a member of the Communist Party, U.S.A." [8]  On March 6, the Attorney General ordered the FBI to wiretap Levison's phone, and some of his conversations with King were intercepted. On June 22, 1963, President John F. Kennedy met with Martin Luther King at the White House.

“The president was very firm and strong with him,” Bobby said. King was dismissive. “He sort of laughs about a lot of these things. Makes fun of it,” Bobby said. King challenged the president’s facts about O’Dell’s communist activities. “I don’t know he’s got to do all that—he’s got two jobs with me,” King shot back. Besides, King said there was no proof that Levison was a communist agent. King’s defiance clearly upset Kennedy. At one point, the president’s face turned red and he shook with anger, according to King. [9]

The President warned King that Levison was a "Kremlin agent," telling Dr. King to get rid of him. King looked the President in the eye and promised he would. But King merely pretended to break off contact with Levison while actually continuing to confer with him through intermediaries. [10]  Levison remained close to King until his assassination in 1968.