In  Stenberg v. Carhart , 530 U.S. 914 (2000), the  U.S. Supreme Court  decision which invalidated state laws against  partial-birth abortion , specifically declaring as unconstitutional a  Nebraska  law that outlawed  partial-birth abortion .  The case was predicated on the practice of  late term abortionist   LeRoy Carhart . [1]  The Court invalidated these laws even though they had never been applied, contrary to its ruling in  United States v. Salerno , 481 U.S. 739, 745 (1987), that a facial challenge to a statute can succeed only if there are no circumstances in which the statute may be applied constitutionally.  The Court did not even cite or distinguish the  Salerno  rule.

This ruling was by the narrowest of margins, 5-4, and one of the Justices in the majority ( Sandra Day O'Connor ) has been replaced by Justice  Samuel Alito .

This decision was subsequently narrowed, or even tacitly overruled, by  Gonzales v. Carhart .

The  main opinion of the court , written by  Stephen Breyer , held that the precedent of  Planned Parenthood v. Casey  required holding as unconstitutional this law based on his view that it placed an "undue burden" on obtaining an  abortion . Justices  Ruth Bader Ginsburg ,  John Paul Stevens , and O'Connor wrote concurrences ( [1] ,  [2] ,  [3] ) which focused on speculative health concerns and the doctor-patient relationship. In particular, O'Connor wrote that such a law required an exception for allowing the procedure if the abortionist felt that his operation was needed for the health of the mother.  In  Bolton v. Doe  (1973), the Court had defined health of the mother to include psychological or even  economic  considerations.

Justice  Anthony Kennedy  wrote a  dissent  arguing that the law was consistent with  Casey  because it allowed some laws protecting the fetuses. Justices  Clarence Thomas  and  Antonin Scalia  wrote separate additional dissents ( [4] ,  [5] ) rejecting that there was any right to an  abortion  at all and thus not recognizing any logic which used  Casey  or  Roe v. Wade . Indeed, Justice Scalia went so far in his dissent to attack Justice Kennedy's claims that the majority was not following  Casey  and argued furthermore that the decision by the majority demonstrated a reducio ad absurdam of  Casey .

Justice Renquist also  dissented , merely repeating that he thought  Casey  was wrongly decided.

A federal law banning  partial-birth abortion  was signed into law in 2003.  Entitled the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act (HR 760, S 3), it passed in the House with a vote of 281-142 and in the Senate with a vote of 64-34.  Federal courts prevented it from ever taking effect until the  U.S. Supreme Court  upheld the law in early 2007 in  Gonzales v. Carhart .