Stephen Peter Munisteri , known as  Steve Munisteri  (born 1958), is a businessman and a former attorney from  Houston , who was elected chairman of the  Republican Party  of  Texas  at the state convention held in  Dallas  on June 13, 2010. He unseated the incumbent  Cathie Louise Mingee Adams , the former director of a crisis pregnancy center in Plano, Texas, and the wife of a Dallas chiropractor. Adams had held the position for only eight months. [1]

Munisteri is the first challenger in modern Texas Republican history to defeat a sitting incumbent for the position of state chairman. Early in his political career, Munisteri served as State Chairman of the Texas Chapter of  Young Americans for Freedom . In 1980, he founded the  Young Conservatives of Texas . [2]

Munisteri was reared in Houston, where his father was an officer of Brown and Root, later president of Enserch Engineers and Construction, Comstock International, and the Texas division of Ford, Bacon & Davis. His mother was first a homemaker but later an editor of professors' textbooks at  Rice University  in Houston and still performs such work on a contract basis. Munisteri has three brothers and two sisters. He graduated from Memorial High School in the Hedwig Village section of Houston, where he was in the National Honor Society and the debate team. He received a Bachelor of Business Administration degree from the  University of Texas  at  Austin  and a Doctor of Jurisprudence from the University of Texas Law School, completing both degrees in five, instead of the customary seven, years. With his law degree in hand, Munisteri returned to Houston to open his solo law practice, which he continued in partnership with others, for twenty-seven years. [3]  Munisteri founded the firm on November 1, 1982, the day before the defeat of  Bill Clements  as the first Republican governor of Texas since 1873. The firm is now known as Sprott, Rigby, Newson, Robbins & Lunceford, P.C. [4]

Munisteri is divorced from the former Deanna Armstrong, whom he met through the University of Texas during the unsuccessful 1976  Ronald W. Reagan  presidential campaign. They rode together on a bus from Austin to  Kansas City ,  Missouri , to attend the 1976 Republican National Convention [3]  held at the Kemper Arena, which nominated  U.S. President   Gerald Ford , and then  U.S. Senator   Robert J. Dole  of  Kansas  for  vice president . Munisteri is a  Presbyterian . The couple had no children. [3]

Munisteri is also a  boxing  promoter in Houston. [5]  Munisteri Sports & Entertainment, Inc., teamed with Worldwide Entertainment and Sports Corp. of West Orange,  New Jersey , to oversee seven heavyweight boxers under Munisteri's direction. The boxers were Obed Sullivan, Derrick Banks, Talmadge Griffis, David Bostice, Ed Wright, Robert Davis, and Ike Ibeabuchi. However, the joint arrangement failed, and Munisteri is retiring from the boxing business. He still manages one fighter and handles announcing and color commentary for boxing shows. [6]

Munisteri was active in politics early in his teenage years, first working as a volunteer for the campaigns of Texas Republicans  Henry C. Grover  and  John G. Tower  in 1972, when the two top Republicans were at odds with each other. [7]  He formed a  conservative club at Memorial High School. In 1976, Munisteri was elected state vice chairman for Texas Young Americans for Freedom, was an active volunteer for Ronald Reagan, and attended the 1976 Republican National Convention. From 1977 to 1980, he served as state chairman of the YAF and was also elected to YAF's national board of directors. Under Munisteri's chairmanship, YAF began the practice of issuing legislative rankings for members of the Texas House of Representatives, a number of whom had more liberal voting records than their constituents had believed. [8]

In 1980, having experienced dissatisfaction with the top-down leadership of the national YAF organization, Munisteri at the February 1980 convention proposed a new Texas-based conservative organization to the Texas YAF board. The board voted unanimously to create a new organization named Young Conservatives of Texas. The organization was officially founded on Texas Independence Day, March 2, 1980 at the Driskill Hotel in Austin.  Munisteri served as the first state YCT chairman. [9]

In September 2009, Texas GOP State Chairman Tina Benkiser announced her resignation at the quarterly State Republican Executive Committee meeting in Austin. [10]  Under Texas law, each major party must at all times have a woman as either its chairman or vice-chairman. Since Vice Chairman Robin Armstrong of Galveston County did not relinquish his position to seek to succeed Benkiser as state chairman, only a woman could be elected to fill the position. On October 24, 2009, the SREC hence elected Texas GOP National Committeewoman Cathie Adams as Benkiser's successor by a vote of thirty-six to twenty-five. [11]

On January 22, 2010, Munisteri announced his candidacy for state chairman, having cited a desire to make the RPT a "more effective organization" by utilizing his "strong business administrative skills". [12]  He was the second declared challenger in the race, as former SREC member Tom Mechler of  Amarillo , had announced his candidacy the previous summer. [13]

During the campaign for state chairman, Munisteri cited the need to reduce recurring party debt which had reached over $700,000. He used that as a factor in unseating Adams. Cathie Adams, however, claimed that party finances were sound, but reports upholding her contention were not released to the  Federal Election Commission  or the Texas Ethics Commission. Munisteri brought a large number of youthful supporters to the convention and overwhelmed Adams' effort to win a full two-year term as chairman. Many of these young people were members of Young Conservatives of Texas, a the organization which  Munisteri had founded in 1980.

On the second day of the convention, delegates voted by senatorial district for the position of state chairman.  Munisteri won thirteen districts, Adams won twelve districts, and Mechler won six.  Since no candidate received a majority of districts, a vote was held in the nominations committee of the convention, and Munisteri won the second ballot by a count of twenty-two to nine.  After the nominations committee presented their results to the full convention, Adams then proceeded to force an unprecedented floor vote for the position, at which point Tom Mechler officially endorsed Munisteri. Then Munisteri addressed the full convention and declared that his differences with Adams are "insignificant to the duty we have to our country." He placed the reelection of Governor  Rick Perry  as his top priority and then the regaining of Republican majorities in the  U.S. House  and the  U.S. Senate . He added, "there's no question we have to get rid of that man in the  White House ," a reference to  U.S. President   Barack H. Obama . [14]  In the ensuing floor vote, Munisteri prevailed with a margin of 4,170 to 2,950 for Adams. [15]

Ed Hubbard, a Harris County delegate who supported Munisteri over Adams, said that the  GOP  must be a "functioning statewide political organization focused on winning elections ... to keep Texas in the Republican column, and keep its policies conservative."

Hubbard offered three reasons for his support of Munisteri:

Upon becoming chairman, Munisteri immediately focused his sights on the reelection of Perry, who won a third full four-year term in the general election on November 2, 2010. Perry also served the last two years of the unexpired term of former Governor and  U.S. President   George W. Bush . He defeated the 2010 challenge of the  Democrat  William Henry "Bill" White, a businessman, former state party chairman and a former mayor of Houston. [14]

Munisteri has issued a regular "Chairman's Update" to Texas Republicans with information regarding his activities as Chairman. In December 2010, Munisteri announced that the RPT had fully retired its crippling debt and would end 2010 with zero debt, all bills paid, a record net worth, and a record positive cash balance in its accounts. [17]

Few state chairmen have presided over a more successful party than Munisteri. The Texas GOP in 2012 continued to hold all statewide constitutional office, the eighteen statewide judgeships, and all three members of the  Texas Railroad Commission . Under Munisteri, his party gained a net of three seats in the U.S. House and twenty-four seats in the Texas House.

Munisteri and Melinda Fredericks of Conroe, another intraparty rival of Cathie Adams, were reelected as chairman and vice-chairman at the state Republican convention held in June 2012 in  Fort Worth , Texas.