The  Suez Crisis  was the abortive military invasion of  Egypt  by  British  and  French  troops in October–November 1956 in an attempt to overthrow the radical government of Colonel  Gamal Abdel Nasser  and restore western control of the  Suez Canal .  At the same time  Israel  also attacked.

Nasser came to power in 1954 and had persuaded the United States, Britain and the  World Bank  to lend money to build the  Aswan High Dam  which would supply Egypt with  hydro-electric power . In July 1956 the US withdrew its promise of a loan (the largest component of the international loan), followed by the other participants. To secure alternative funding, Nasser nationalised the Suez Canal Company. This was perceived as an act of aggression by Britain and France. The two powers drew up an intervention plan with Israel: Israel would respond to Egyptian provocations by launching an attack; Anglo-French forces would then 'intervene' to protect the security of the canal.

Israel  attacked Egypt on 29 October 1956. On 30 October Britain and France demanded that both sides withdrew ten miles from the canal; on 31 October they began to bomb Egyptian airfields following Egyptian refusal to comply with the ultimatum; on 5 November Anglo-French paratroopers captured  Port Said  and prepared to advance along the canal.

However, US President  Eisenhower  condemned the joint action at the United Nations and pressed for a cease-fire. This was concluded on 6 November 1956, and British and French forces withdrew by mid December. Britain had been forced to agree by its need for an  International Monetary Fund  loan which America could otherwise have vetoed.

The outcome of the crisis was a severe blow to the prestige and great power pretensions of Britain and France, and helped Nasser to build up an image as a pan-Arab strong man. It also diverted Western attention from the  Soviet Union 's intervention in  Hungary  as  Nikita Khrushchev  crushed the anti-Communist uprising in that country.

Sir  Anthony Eden , who had been British  Prime Minister  throughout the crisis, resigned in early 1957, ostensibly for health reasons.

The incident demonstrated the weakness of the  NATO  alliance regarding prior consultation with allies before a use of force and NATO's lack of planning and cooperation outside the  European  theatre.