The  Super Bowl  — derisively called the "Super Subsidy" because taxpayers foot much of the expense, or the "Super Fleece" because the prices are such a ripoff — is the championship game at the end of each  National Football League  (NFL) season, featuring a half-time show that is increasingly  liberal  and sometimes even pro- homosexual .  It is held in a different city each year and is also televised.  The game is a tool of the  liberal media  in bullying states, which are scheduled to host the event, into rejecting  conservative  legislation.  The over-hyped game is played between the winners of the  National Football Conference  (NFC) and  American Football Conference  (AFC), but most the viewers have no idea or interest in how the teams got there.  For four straight years continuing through 2015, the number of viewers of the Super Bowl in the key demographic of 18 to 49 years old has declined.  The media has been criticized for over-hyping the audience. [1]

The mayor of Glendale,  Arizona , expected his city to lose money from hosting the 2015 Super Bowl: "I totally believe we will lose money on this," mayor Jerry Weiers told  ESPN . [2]   Despite this, and how independent economists have shown that the benefit to a Super Bowl host city is zero or nearly so, the taxpayer-supported NFL absurdly claims that a city receives benefits of $500 million just for hosting the Super Bowl.

The NFL was so harmful to local businesses and taxpayers of New Jersey in 2014 that 55% of business leaders who were surveyed afterwards said they did not want New Jersey to host the game again. [3]   Part of the NFL's bilking of taxpayers was its demand for a $7.5 million rebate on sales taxes. [3]

The first Super Bowl ever played was in 1967 as a championship game between the top teams in the National Football League and the now-defunct  American Football League  (AFL). The teams that played in the first Super Bowl were the  Green Bay Packers  from the NFL and the  Kansas City Chiefs  from the AFL.  After the AFL's merger into the NFL in 1969, the Super Bowl became the championship game within the NFL pitting the top teams from the AFC and NFC. The winners of the Super Bowl are awarded the  Vince Lombardi  Trophy, named for the Packer's legendary coach during the 1960s.

Super Bowl XLV  was played in  Dallas ,  Texas  on February 6, 2011 between the  Green Bay Packers , the NFC Champions, and the  Pittsburgh Steelers , the AFC Champions. The Packers won Super Bowl XLV 31 - 25 (four converted touchdowns and one field goal to two converted touchdowns, one two-point converted touchdown, and a field goal). Aaron Rodgers, the Packers quarterback, was named Most Valuable Player.

The teams who contested Super Bowl XLV are two of the most successful in NFL history. The Steelers won six Super Bowl championships prior to Super Bowl XLV; the Packers have now won four Super Bowls and also hold the record for NFL championships in the pre-Super Bowl era.

Super Bowls are the most watched television broadcasts in history, but much of the audience simply uses the game as background noise during parties. Super Bowl XLVIII was the highest rated broadcast in history, with an average viewership of 112 million. [4]  Viewership has been slightly increasing in recent years, but slightly less than half of televisions are tuned into the game. [5]  Super Bowl LI is the first Super Bowl in the history of its existence to have a game end in overtime.