Taylor Alison Swift  (born December 13, 1989) is an American  Grammy -nominated  American   pop music  singer-songwriter. She has received numerous awards, and one of these was being named Billboard Magazine Artist of the Year for 2009 and received the title Artist of the Year at the Country Music Awards. She has, in the past, been praised by many  Conservative  parent advocacy groups for being a positive role model for young people. However, due to  Hollywood values , Swift began to sell sex in her lyrics and attire in appearances.

Swift was born in the town of Wyomissing, Pennsylvania. Her father is Scott Swift, a stock broker, and her mother is Andrea, a homemaker. She was raised in a Christian home and went to a Christian high school. After starting her career, she became  homeschooled  and finished her diploma in this fashion.

She released her first album,  Taylor Swift  in late 2006 which became #1 on the Billboard Top Country Albums and #5 on the Billboard Hot 200. She released her second album,  Fearless  in 2008 which debuted at #1 on the Billboard Hot 200. She was the first artist in history to have two different albums in the Top 10 on the year end album chart. It also was the first album by a female artist in country music history to log eight weeks at #1 on The Billboard 200.  Speak Now  was released in October 2010 and was followed by  Red  in 2012 and in 2014 Swift's first official pop album  1989  became her best selling album and the  1989 World Tour  became her best selling tour by far.

Swift is the youngest artist in history to win Album of the Year award. Swift was also awarded the Country Music Academy's Crystal Milestone Award, given for Outstanding Achievement in Country Music. The Academy praised her for career achievements including selling more albums in 2008 than any other artist in any genre of music, the first time a country artist had done that, the breakthrough success of her debut album (which spawned five Top 10 hits, more than any in history for a female artist's debut CD), and the worldwide crossover success of her #1 single "Love Story". The Academy also cited Swift's contribution to helping country music attract a younger audience and her family-friendly lyrics and performances. When Swift transitioned to pop music, these concerts became far less family friendly.

In 2009 Taylor Swift became the female artist with the most top-40 songs of the decade with her song  Fifteen .  Fifteen  is a song promoting abstinence and used in  Best Buy 's campaign for @15, a charity which helps teenagers get involved in their communities. Taylor Swift has donated over $750,000 to the  Red Cross  and $250,000 to various schools around the country, some of which were Christian-based education schools. She has also donated $10,000 to St Jude's Children's Research Hospital.