Thomas Stearns Eliot  (1888-1965) was an  American -born British poet, playwright, and literary critic.  He was a dominant force in the English and American literary scene during the middle third of the twentieth century, and presented a powerful conservative voice. His poems include "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" (1915), "The Waste Land" (1922), and "The Journey of the Magi" (1927); his plays include "Murder in the Cathedral" (1935). His light verse book "Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats" (1939), was later made into the hit musical "Cats" (1981).  He studied at Oxford, Paris, and Harvard.  He won the Nobel Prize for literature.

T. S. Eliot was born and grew up in St. Louis,  Missouri , and came from a prominent intellectual family of Yankee origins.  In 1914 he moved to England.

In 1927 Eliot was baptized into the Church of England, became a subject of the king, began publishing essays by conservative thinkers, and proclaimed himself a "classicist in literature, royalist in politics, and anglo-catholic in religion." He became deeply involved in Church affairs and wrote a historical play about the Church, "Murder in the Cathedral," which was first performed in the chapter house of Canterbury Cathedral in June 1935.

Eliot's religious views are most notably contained in the poem  Ash Wednesday , which he wrote in 1927 after his conversion, as well as in the  Four Quartets,  which were four related poems published separately between 1935 and 1942, and republished in one volume in 1943. Their titles are  Burnt Norton , [1]   East Coker , [2]   The Dry Salvages , [3]  and  Little Gidding . [4]

Eliot considered  Four Quartets  to be his masterpiece. It draws upon his three-decade-long study of mysticism and philosophy. Christian imagery and symbolism is abundant in the poems.

Notable plays include  The Cocktail Party , which concerns a group of contemporary people talking about their marital and other problems, and who are counseled by a mysterious character, ostensibly a psychiatrist, and  Murder in the Cathedral , which is about the death of  Thomas Becket .

Some famous lines from T. S. Eliot that are often alluded to or quoted include: