The  Twenty-Fifth Amendment  to the  United States Constitution  provides:

Section 2 . Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.

Section 3 . Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.

Section 4 . Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.

Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, assembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session. If the Congress within twenty-one days after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in session within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office.

This Amendment, ratified in 1967, was adopted in response to President Eisenhower's heart attack and the assassination of President Kennedy.  There were earlier concerns when President Wilson had a very disabling stroke but stayed in power because his wife and the White House concealled the illness. [1]   Given the pressure of the  Cold War  to have a President always available to provide leadership, even in the event of an illness, a clear procedure was needed to define who could make decisions as Commander-in-Chief.  Some argue that the amendment could be misused to authorized the president to handpick his successor by (1) obtaining the resignation of the vice-president, (2) appointing a new vice-president, and then (3) resigning.  Six years later, President Nixon handpicked the future President Ford in this manner, without Ford ever being elected president.  (Of course, the new Vice President was confirmed by the United States Senate.)

Conservatives criticize this amendment by arguing that it was passed to allow unelectable, but powerful, politicians like Nelson Rockefeller to become president.  Indeed, President Ford picked Nelson Rockefeller as his vice president, making Rockefeller next-in-line to become president.  Prior to this amendment and for most of American history, a vacancy in the office of vice-president remained unfilled until the next presidential election. (During such vacancies, an official of the party opposing the President could take office if the President died or left office.)

Since its adoption, many fictional works have illustrated its function and short comings.  Most notably,  The West Wing  had the President step aside when his daughter Zoe was kindnapped transferring power to the Speaker of the House who was of the opposite party. [2]   The President then resumed serving in the office when his daughter is recovered.

In the television series  Scandal , the Vice President takes over following an unsuccessful assassination attempt. The President struggles to portray himself as physically recovered in order to convince the Vice President and the cabinet not to take the issue to the Senate.  The Vice President ends up agreeing to hand power back to him. [3]

Bill of Rights : 
 1  - Freedom of speech, press, etc.  
 2  - Right to bear arms  
 3  - Quartering of soldiers  
 4  - Warrants  
 5  - Due process  
 6  - Right to a speedy trial  
 7  - Right by trial of a jury  
 8  - No cruel or unusual punishments  
 9  - Unenumerated rights  
 10  - Power to the people and states

11  - Immunity of states to foreign suits 
 12  - Revision of presidential election procedures 
 13  - Abolition of slavery 
 14  - Citizenship 
 15  - Racial suffrage 
 16  - Federal income tax 
 17  - Direct election to the United States Senate 
 18  - Prohibition of alcohol 
 19  - Women's suffrage 
 20  - Terms of the presidency 
 21  - Repeal of Eighteenth Amendment 
 22  - Limits the president to two terms 
 23  - Electoral College 
 24  - Prohibition of poll taxes 
 25  - Presidential disabilities 
 26  - Voting age lowered to 18 
 27  - Variance of congressional compensation