Admiral C. F. Hughes (AP-124)  was laid down under a Maritime Commission contract (MC hull 682) on 29 November 1943 at Alameda,  California , by the Bethlehem-Alameda Shipyard, Inc.; launched on 27 August 1944; sponsored by Mrs. Louise Nimitz, the wife of Capt. Otto Nimitz and the sister-in-law of future Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz; delivered to the Navy on 31 January 1945; and commissioned that same day, Capt. John Trebes, USCG, in command.

Following shakedown training along the west coast, Admiral C. F. Hughes embarked naval officers and marines at San Diego for transportation to Hawaii. She departed San Diego on 13 March and arrived in Pearl Harbor on the 18th. There, she took on another group of passengers bound for the United States and then got underway on the 23d. The transport arrived in San Francisco on 28 March, disembarked her passengers, and then set sail for San Diego on 9 April. Admiral C. F. Hughes reached her destination the following day and began taking on more travelers. On the 14th, the transport left San Diego and set a westward course. The ship entered Pearl Harbor on the 19th, and some passengers left her while others came on board. Three days later, she put to sea on her way to the Mariana Islands. Admiral C. F. Hughes put in at Guam on 30 April, and all her passengers disembarked. After taking another group on board, including 221  Japanese  prisoners of war, she stood out of Apra Harbor on 3 May. The transport made a two-day stop at  Pearl Harbor  from 10 to 12 May to disembark the prisoners and then continued her voyage back to the west coast. She moored at  San Francisco  on 17 May.

On 26 May 1945 the transport sailed for Europe by way of the embarked troops from the  European  theater for redeployment to the  Pacific . The transport retraced her route through the  Panama Canal  and reached Manila on 20 July. Admiral C. F. Hughesembarked troops at Leyte, Biak in the Schouten Islands, and Hollandia, New Guinea, before leaving the latter port on 4 August to return to the  United States . She delivered the returning servicemen at San Francisco on 17 August.

The ship put to sea on 31 August with replacements for western Pacific garrisons. Steaming via Ulithi, she arrived at Tacloban, Leyte, on 17 September. Admiral C. F. Hughes visited Manila again before heading back to North America on the 24th. She paused at Victoria, Canada, on 9 October to repatriate former prisoners of war from various Commonwealth nations, and arrived at Seattle, Wash., later that day. The transport made one more round-trip voyage to Yokohama before she was decommissioned on 3 May 1946. She was returned to the War Shipping Administration which, in turn, transferred her to the Army. Her name was struck from the Navy list in June 1946.

The Army renamed the ship General Edwin D. Patrick (q.v.), and she served the Army Transport Service until 1 March 1950 when the Navy reacquired her. Retaining her Army name, she was assigned to the Military Sea Transportation Service (MSTS) and was manned by a civil service crew. Operating out of San Francisco, USNS General Edwin D. Patrick (T-AP-124) spent almost two decades transporting troops and cargo to American bases throughout the western Pacific, and supported American arms in the conflicts in Korea and Vietnam. Early in 1967, the transport was placed in a ready reserve status. On 30 September 1968, the ship was to be laid up at the Maritime Administration's National Defense Reserve Fleet facility at Suisun Bay, Calif. On 31 August 1969, title to the ship was transferred to the Maritime Administration. As of 1 July 1988, the transport was still berthed at Suisun Bay. [1]