The  Weather Underground Organization  ( WUO ), or  Weathermen  is a  leftist   terrorist  organization now possibly inactive. [1]  Since its inception the Weather Underground identified its fundamental strategic thesis with the  Maoist  Chinese.  In its initial ideological statement,  You Don't Need a Weatherman to Know Which Way the Wind Blows,  the objective of wealth redistribution was put forward to justify revolutionary violence:

In 2002, Sam Green and Bill Siegel produced a documentary about the Weather Underground. [3]

The lineage of the Weather Underground goes back 6 decades before its creation.  Initially, a group called the  Intercollegiate Socialist Society  was founded to "throw light on the world wide movement toward industrial democracy known as socialism".  Then in 1921, the ISS changed its name to the  League for Industrial Democracy  along with shifting its aim to a larger scope than just the college campus.  The League had two student subsidiaries, a  Student League for Industrial Democracy  which came into existence in 1932 and only lasting for three years.  The SLID was reconstituted again in 1945, and would follow the lead of the initial group's history and rename itself; this time changing from SLID into  Students for a Democratic Society .

It is SDS that the Weather Underground directly splinters from.  Within SDS, the Weathermen grew out of a faction called the Revolutionary Youth Movement (RYM). [4]

The group took its name and the name for their manifesto from a lyric of a  Bob Dylan  song  Subterranean Homesick Blues . [5]

According to the traditional  Soviet  sponsored  Leninist  model, the  proletariat  is the main revolutionary force, and  national liberation movements  become its allies. According to  Maoist  inspired Weathermen, however, the revolutionary national movements were proletarian revolutions in their own right against the world imperialist class, and provided the leadership in the worldwide anti-imperialist revolution. [6]

On September 13th, 1970, the weathermen helped  Timothy Leary  escape from a prison in San Luis Obispo. [7]

The Weathermen engaged in several forms of recruitment.  One of those was the high school "jailbreak", where students would run through campus shouting "jailbreak", in an effort to urge others to join them. [8]

One member remarked of the effort: "If you're too chicken to do anything more than leaflet at your high school, then you're part of the problem." [9]

In 1969, the Weathermen held a series of protests known as the " Days of Rage ". [10]   Following the events, the FBI arrested activists including  Linda Evans  and Dianne Donghi. [11]

The use of the moniker  Days of Rage  would be used by future revolutionary groups and movements, including  Occupy Wall Street ,  Anonymous , and during the  Arab Spring .

Their ideology was explicitly  communist  and  revolutionary .  After issuing a formal "Declaration of War on AmeriKKKa"(which they always spelled with three capital "K's") the underground went on a bombing spree. [13]

Ron Fliegelman was the chief architect for bomb devices inside the WUO. [14]   In the 1970's, the organization was successfully infiltrated by an informant for the  FBI ,  Larry Grathwohl . [15]   Grathwohl wrote about what he had learned in a book he wrote,  BRINGING DOWN AMERICA: An FBI Informant with the Weathermen . [16]

At a 1969 "War Council" in  Flint ,  Michigan , spokeswoman  Bernardine Dohrn  gave her most memorable and notorious speech. Holding her fingers in what became the Weatherman "fork salute," she said of the bloody murders recently committed by the  Manson Family  in which the pregnant actress Sharon Tate and a Folgers Coffee heiress, and several other inhabitants of a Benedict Canyon mansion were brutally stabbed to death, [17]

October 6, 1969 - the organization's first bombing act was at a statue built to memorialize police victims of the 1886  Haymarket Affair  in which anarchists violently protested. [18]   The underground bombed the statue again exactly one year later on October 6, 1970. [19]

On March 6, 1970, while preparing for a  terrorist  attack on  Fort Dix , several members were injured in the "Greenwich Village Explosion". [20]   Three members were killed: Ted Gold, Diana Oughton, and Terry Robbins. Other members,  Cathy Wilkerson  and  Kathy Boudin , survived and were defended by  National Lawyers Guild   [21]  members. Kathy Boudin later received a 20-years-to-life sentence for her role in the 1981 Weatherman Nyack, New York Brinks armored truck robbery which resulted in the murders of two policemen and an armored truck security guard. [22]

For a more detailed treatment, see  COINTELPRO .

As a subversive communist organization, the Weathermen were later known to be targets of the  FBI 's Counter Intelligence Program.  In April 1971, an FBI office in Media, Pennsylvania was broken into by the "Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI", exposing the program.   J. Edgar Hoover  shut down the program later that year. [23]

In 1995 a cadre of like minded individuals gathered in the home of Weather Underground (WUO)  terrorists   Bernardine Dohrn  and  William "Bill" Ayers .  According to Dr.  Quentin Young , "I can remember being one of a small group of people who came to Bill Ayers' house to learn that  Alice Palmer  was stepping down from the senate and running for Congress."  Dr. Young, a longtime friend of the Ayers' and  President Obama , put up the money in 1968 to pay for the office that organized a riot in Chicago during the Democratic National Convention.  Carl Davidson  of  Progressives for Obama  was told by  Fidel Castro  in March 1968 that Castro believed the United States was ready for  revolution . Several  Students for a Democratic Society  (SDS) and WUO cadre trained in Cuba with the "Venceremos Brigades" [27]  prior to the insurgency.  The FBI summarized the situation:

One veteran of the guerrilla warfare training in Cuba was Obama's host,  Bernardine Dohrn .  Young met with Dohrn after her return,

Dr. Young related Illinois State Senator Alice Palmer was choosing then Chicago city councilman  Barack Obama  as her successor. [30]  Palmer once served on the executive board of the  U.S. Peace Council , a  KGB  front organization [31]  that actively opposed President  Ronald Reagan 's defense program.  Palmer wrote a report on her visit to  Moscow  for the 27th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) published by the CPUSA's  People's Daily World .  In the twilight of the Soviet regime Palmer wrote, "Like the Reagan administration, the Soviets talk of increasing productivity among workers and curbing waste...but the Soviets' do not link these issues with ruining the living standards of human beings."

Ayers and Dohrn took credit, and have never denied responsibility for a series of  terrorist  bombings which included the  U.S. Capitol , the  Pentagon  and the  State Department .    The reopening of a  cold case   homicide  investigation of a  San Francisco  police officer was urged by the San Francisco Police Officer's Association in March 2009. [33]   An FBI informant who infiltrated the  WUO [34]  and was close to Ayers reported an exchange he had with Ayers about a prospective bombing:

Ayers and Dohrn were not prosecuted because of tainted evidence gathered by the  FBI .  Assistant Director of the FBI  Mark Felt , also known as “Deep Throat” in the  Watergate Affair , [35]  was prosecuted and convicted for civil rights violations of Jennifer Dohrn, Bernardine’s sister, while tracking the terrorist pair.  Ayers boasted in his book that he was "guilty as hell, free as a bird," and Felt was pardoned by President  Ronald Reagan  who noted Felt followed procedures he believed "essential to keep the Director of the FBI, the  Attorney General , and the  President of the United States  advised of the activities of hostile foreign powers and their collaborators in this country. [36] [37]

Ayers, Dohrn and Barack Obama's relationship went back several years and they were lending their notoriety among  radical   leftists  to launch Obama's career as Palmer's successor. Ayers' and Dohrn's first book written with  Jeff Jones , the title  Prairie Fire  is taken from the sayings of  Chairman Mao 's  Little Red Book ,  [7]  "a single spark can set a prairie fire"," announces,

Co-author and co-Weather Underground founder Jeff Jones [39]  worked for several years with  Obama administration  Green Czar  Van Jones , another self-described communist arrested in the aftermath of a deadly riot.  Like  Frank Marshall Davis , there is no indication Ayers, Dohrn, Jeff Jones, Dr. Young,  Anita Dunn , or other close associates of Obama have renounced their faith in what  Allen Weinstein  describes as "a murderous and discredited ideology."

Obama was elected to the Illinois State Senate in 1996 and served there for the next eight years.

President Obama is the first person having ties to a known former terrorist to gain control over America's nuclear weapons. [40] [41]   Author and blogger Jack Cashill requisitioned a comparison of the writing style of  Bill Ayers ' 2001 memoir,  Fugitive Days , with Barack Obama's earlier 1995 book,  Dreams From My Father , and came to the conclusion that Obama's former boss Ayers may have ghostwritten Dreams. [42]  Ayers confesses to violent acts, planting bombs, says he has no regrets and feels he "should have done more." [43]

Founding/Supervisory Organizations:

Supporting Organizations:

Type of Organization: Terrorist/revolutionary

Location: United States

Ideological cover: Openly  Marxist-Leninist

Activities: Urban guerrilla warfare; bombings;  assassinations ; riots; armed robbery; prison organizing; prison breaks

Target countries:  United States

Status: Inactive

Assisted Organizations:

Derivative/Controlled Organizations:

Intercollegiate Socialist Society 
    ↳  League for Industrial Democracy      →                    →                    → 
            ↳  Student League for Industrial Democracy (1932)       →  American Student Union 
            ↳  Student League for Industrial Democracy (1945)       →  Students for a Democratic Society 
                                                                                                            ↳ Weather Underground