White supremacy  is a  racist  ideology which asserts that  white people  (often known as  ' Aryans ', although not in the Indo-Iranian sense) are somehow "better" than people of other races. These feelings can range from mild (personal bigotry) to extreme (advocating political and social dominance for white people, or ethnic cleansing). White supremacism is often associated with  evolutionary racism ,  Nazism  and other  fascist  ideologies.

Adolf Hitler  was an  evolutionary   racist  who advocated that the German people were the master race. [2]   Albert Speer  wrote that Hitler "was highly annoyed by the series of triumphs by the marvelous colored American runner,  Jesse Owens . People whose antecedents came from the jungle were primitive, Hitler said with a shrug; their physiques were stronger than those of civilized whites and hence should be excluded from future games." [3]

White supremacism as a movement in the United States was most recently closely associated with four groups,  Aryan Nations , the  National Alliance , the  Creativity Movement , and  White Aryan Resistance , as well as many smaller, often short-lived groups.  All four of these groups peaked in the 1980s-90s and are now in disarray.  Aryan Nations, in particular, attempted to unite disparate elements of white supremacism around the  Christian  Identity belief system.

Another group, the  Ku Klux Klan , which has existed in some form since  Reconstruction , is also closely associated with white supremacism.

In 2005, Dr. Jerry Bergman wrote:

Duke’s father, a geologist, tried to reconcile evolution with Christianity by concluding that evolution was the means God used to create life. This background set the groundwork for Duke’s later acceptance of Darwinism. As he read more and more on ‘the scientific issue of race’, he became torn between his religion and science. Duke was doing his research on Darwinism while he was attending a Church of Christ school in New Orleans. As a result of his study of evolution, Duke openly challenged his Sunday school teachers by discussing his evolving ideas about the origin of humans, and their implication for racism. When endeavouring to combine his Darwinist racist beliefs with Christianity, Duke used many of the same rationalizations used by theistic evolutionists to rationalize the plain statements of Genesis.

Duke eventually sided with Darwinism and rejected creationism. He concluded that with, ‘each passing day more evidence emerges of the dynamic, genetically-born, physical and physiological differences between the races’. So ended his ‘fleeting commitment’ to orthodox Christianity, even though he still peppers his writings with religious phrases, such as if ‘I can move our people one inch toward … God … my life will have been worthwhile’. His life tells a very different story. In short, after his acceptance of Darwinism, Duke unabashedly classified both the European and Asian races at a ‘higher level of human evolution than the African race’. He concluded that, ‘the evolution of man from his primitive to his modern state came from Nature’. Duke now firmly believes that ‘all life on Earth had evolved and is still undergoing change’. [5]

For more information, please see:  Darwin's influence on modern racists  by Dr. Jerry Bergman

Creativity, which is espoused by the  Creativity Movement , is an  atheistic  white supremacist movement. [6] [7] [8]