Secret apparatus 
 Tennessee Valley Authority 
 Office of Emergency Management 
 War Production Board 
 American Youth Congress 
 American Peace Mobilization 
 Myrna group

William Walter Remington  was born 25 October 1917 in New Jersey and received a B.A. from Dartmouth College in 1939 and an M.A. from Columbia University in 1940, also having completed most of the requirements for a Ph.D.

Remington was employed from September 1936 to May 1937 with the  Tennessee Valley Authority , Knoxville, Tennessee; April 1937 to August 1937 with the Workers' Education project, Knoxville, Tennessee; and from May 1940 to July 15, 1941, a Junior Economist with the National Resources Planning Board in Washington D.C; from July 1941 to February 1942 Remington was an associate industrial economist in the Consumers Division of the Office of Emergency Management; from February 1942 to October 1943 Remington worked as an assistant to the Director of the  War Production Board  (WPB), and from October 1943 an assistant to the Director of Orders ans Regulations Bureau in the WPB.

Remington was employed in a number of posts, principally as an economist:

During a  Hatch Act  investigation it was discovered Remington had been active in the  American Peace Mobilization  and did research for the  American Youth Congress  in February 1941. Remington's wife, Ann, was the executive secretary of the Washington chapter of the  American Peoples Mobilization .

Remington supplied  Elizabeth Bentley  for transmission to the  Soviet Union  information such as: charts setting out aircraft production and other matters concerning the aircraft industry; tests made on aircraft and other data concerning high octane gasoline; other information related to the aircraft production field; and a process for the manufacture of synthetic rubber. Remington introduced Bentley to  Bernard Redmont .

After  World War II , Remington obtained a position with the Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion. In 1946, Remington was about to be transferred to a professional position at the  White House  as an aide to a presidential assistant when FBI suspicion put a stop to it. After that Remington was in the process of applying for a position with the  Atomic Energy Commission  when the FBI interviewed him in 1947.

Remington later was convicted of perjury for denying Communist Party activity and was killed in a prison brawl.