1.	List, by order of influence, who you think were the five most influential persons in all of world history.

5. Hitler 4. Thomas Edison 3. Charles Darwin 2. Isaac Newton 1. Jesus Christ	 other notable mentions include Alexander the Great, Augustus Ceaser, Attila the Hun, and of course…Paul McCartney

2.	List, by order of influence, what you think were the five most influential breakthroughs or ideas in all of world history.

5. The wheel 4. The system of checks and balances3. Communism2. Evolution 1. The alphabet

3.	Compare and contrast World War Two to World War One, focusing on their causes and effects rather than specific battles

I feel almost like WW1 and WW2 were part of the same war, because there would most likely not have been a WW2 without WW1. Both times we were not required to fight, and I question how much we needed to. I think we could probably have avoided our part in WW1, but we felt we had to get revenge for the ships that the Germans had sunk containing American passengers. However I do feel like we needed to enter into WW2 or Hitler would have likely become a world dictator. I think it might have taken both of these wars to warm Europe up to the fact that they can’t just continuously fight for power, and that whenever they do, numerous lives are lost. In WW2 we were also up against Japan as well, which added quite a lot to our plate, since Japan was and probably still is to this day, one of the greatest and most brutal armies. We ended that segment of the war in the most complete way possible: the atomic bomb.

4.

5.	Write an essay of at least 200 words on any aspect of world history.

I will hand my essay in.

6.

7.	Does history repeat itself? Explain, with some examples.

History can repeat itself, but it is all part of an ever evolving ‘big picture’. Everything is constantly changing and advancing but in the midst of that, we do see certain cycles repeating themselves. I will explain with a simple example, in the 60s, everyone’s hair was long, and everyone was a hippie. By the time the 70s and 80s came around, the style was short hair again. When the 90s came along, hair got long again, but this time with a different twist, a bigger and puffier twist. Now both long hair AND short hair are ‘in’. So you see, it was switching back and forth from long hair to short hair, but the whole time, it was progressing.

8.	After taking this course, what do you think about world history helping us predict the future? Include a specific example.

I think world history can help us see which direction we might be headed in. But we can never really be sure, the only thing we can really be sure of, is the present, and the past, since I think the future is just a myth. However, we can use world history to help us learn from our mistakes. Because we can see the mistakes we made in the past, and from there if we see the cycle I talked about in the last question, change our actions, and thus, change the outcome.

9.

10.	Discuss any issue or controversy related to World War Two.

Probably the biggest controversy over WW2 was whether or not we should have dropped the second bomb on Japan, and if we should have dropped them on Japan’s Navy instead of their cities. I think that what we did was completely fine, I feel like with any other country (besides Germany perhaps) it would have been utterly wrong to drop a bomb in one of their cities, killing innocent woman and children. But in this case I think Japan needed something like that to finally make them surrender.

Daniel N.