Michelle F

1. Which do you like better, classical  India  or China, and why?

Classical  China . The technologies discovered by this country. While India may have invented zero and chess, the Chinese inventions are for more important.  The printing press in and of itself was revolutionary.  We use it incessantly.  I don’t think anyone can deny the usefulness of the printing press, while it could be argued the zero is unnecessary.  And not everyone values chess. Also invented by China, paper and gunpowder.  The Chinese are also a very hardworking people, who earn their keep, instead of excusing laziness by saying that they were put in their position and accepting it.

2. What advantage did  Buddhism  have over  Hinduism  in converting people outside India?

Buddhism is not as moral, and does not believe in castes.  Castes are very politically incorrect and are not something most people would want to be associated with.  Buddhism also does not believe in God or a Supreme Being that you have answer to when you die.  They believe that Buddha is the creator. Hindus believe that Brahman is the Supreme Creator, or, God.  Buddhism’s lack of God would appeal to many people in this day and age.

3. Explain what this is:

The Yin Yang, also known as the Taijitu, is the symbol for Taoism.  The Yin side, which is darker, is negative, passive, or feminine.  The lighter side, the Yang, is active, positive, and masculine.  The sides do not represent struggle between the two states, but harmony.

4. What aspect or aspects of Hinduism have enabled it to survive for so long?

It’s adaptive nature, and acceptance of other religions and gods.  There are few absolutes, many gods, and morals are left up to the individual’s conscience.  It is a religion that allows people to be whatever they choose to be and believe almost anything, and still be a “good” person.

5. Describe and explain one or more of your favorite insights by Sun Tzu.

“Regard your soldiers as your children, and they will follow you into the deepest valleys; look upon them as your own beloved sons, and they will stand by you even unto death.”

If you mistreat those who work under you they will have no reason to try and work well, to attempt to win. They will not trust you and that will result in chaos and rebellion.  You have to gain their trust, to treat people well, especially in war and other such dangerous occupations. If you don’t trust your commander, why would you risk your life on his word?  If he says attack, why would you?

“Opportunities multiply as they are seized.”
Someone who takes opportunities as they come will find that taking one opens up three more. Taking those three opens up three more from each opportunity. If, however, you never strive, you will find that you will get nowhere.  If you are always waiting for the perfect opportunity, you will be waiting forever, because it will never come.

6. Take your pick, classical India or China, and list in chronological order the major empires along with their time periods.

Mauryan Empire (322-185 B.C.), Gupta Empire (320-467 A.D.).  Other than these two empires, the Indians didn’t have very organized or efficient government.  If their elephants had not scared Alexander the Great off, it is doubtful whether India would have survived.  I do not know if India was/is all it was/is said to be.

7. Current events question (choose “a” or “b”):

(b) The Silk Road established and developed during the Han dynasty was similar in some ways to the Internet today.

No, not really. Yes, it helped make trade and communication easier and faster, but it did not compare to the Internet.  The speed at which communication is possible and the distance it covers is mind-boggling.  It provides information within seconds, trade is fast and easy, communication is fast and readily available. Not to mention the fact that it can all be accessed from a device that can fit in the palm of your hand: your cell phone.  It is also available to more people than the Silk Road was.  The Silk Road was in China, the Internet can be accessed almost everywhere.

H2. Some question whether Confucianism is really a religion. What is your view?

That depends on how you define religion.  Dictionary.com defines religion as:

1. A set of beliefs concerning the cause, nature, and purpose of the universe, esp. when considered as the creation of a superhuman agency or agencies, usually involving devotional and ritual observances, and often containing a moral code governing the conduct of human affairs.

2. A specific fundamental set of beliefs and practices generally agreed upon by a number of persons or sects: the Christian religion; the Buddhist religion.

5. The practice of religious beliefs; ritual observance of faith.

6. Something one believes in and follows devotedly; a point or matter of ethics or conscience: to make a religion of fighting prejudice.

If this is how you would define religion (and it seems to be a fairly reasonable definition) then I would say no, Confucianism is not a religion.  It does not recognize a Creator. It does not deny the existence of a Creator, but it does not recognize or worship any supreme being.  It is merely a following of a dead person’s morals.  No God, no creator, no afterlife, nothing after this earth.  That is not religion, not even in the crudest sense of the word.

H3. How do you think the major belief systems of today, as ranked in the lecture, will rank in 100 years?

Hopefully Christianity will be higher by far than any other religion.  Logically, however, I think Anti-religious, atheist, agnostics, whatever you want to call them, will be second, followed by Islam. I think Judaism will lose followers, and “religions” like Scientology will gain followers.  I fear that anti-religious followers will greatly outnumber Christians.  But, you never know, God isn’t always logical, and miracles do still happen.

H4. Describe what you think was the greatest contribution to the world by classical India or China.

I think the Chinese invention of the compass was most important.  While I personally use paper constantly, and can’t imagine not have books, which are a result of the printing press, I would still have to say the compass was most important.  It allowed for safer traveling, more exploration, and the discovery of more continents, like America.  Maps of America were found in China and date back earlier than Columbus and Amerigo Vespuci. It is not well known, because it does not fit with many historians neat, tidy view of how history happened.  They are rewriting and editing history to make it fit with their worldview.  Talk about bigoted.