The  Adelaide Symphony Orchestra  (ASO) is an Australian orchestra based in  Adelaide , South Australia. Its primary venue is the  Adelaide Town Hall , but the ASO also performs in other venues such as  Elder Hall  at the  University of Adelaide  and the  Adelaide Festival Centre . The ASO provides the orchestral support for all productions of the  State Opera of South Australia , as well as the Adelaide performances of the  Australian Ballet  and  Opera Australia . The orchestra is also a regular featured ensemble at the  Adelaide Festival .

In 1936 the  South Australian Orchestra  was supplanted by the 50-member Adelaide Symphony Orchestra led by  William Cade , and sponsored by the  Australian Broadcasting Commission . [1]  The orchestra reformed in 1949 as the 55-member South Australian Symphony Orchestra, with  Henry Krips  as its resident conductor. The orchestra reverted to its original title, the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra, in late 1975, and currently comprises 74 permanent members. Chief conductors of the orchestra have included  Elyakum Shapirra ,  Piero Gamba ,  Albert Rosen ,  Nicholas Braithwaite , and  David Porcelijn . The ASO's most recent chief conductor was  Arvo Volmer , who held the post from 2004 to 2013. He is currently the ASO's principal guest conductor and artistic advisor. [2]  In 2007, the orchestra partnered with  Hilltop Hoods  to prepare a re-orchestrated release of their album  The Hard Road , titled  The Hard Road: Restrung . [3]  In 2015 the Hilltop Hoods collaborated for a second time with the 32-piece Adelaide Symphony Orchestra and the 20-piece Adelaide Chamber Singers Choir for their next re-orchestrated album titled  Drinking from the Sun, Walking Under Stars Restrung . [4]

The ASO's achievements have included its 1998 performances of  Richard Wagner 's  Ring Cycle , the first Australian production since 1913 [5]  (although it was widely and erroneously claimed to be the first ever in Australia). The orchestra participated in the first fully Australian production of  The Ring  in 2004.

In 2009 Premier and Arts Minister  Mike Rann  proposed and provided government funding to the ASO to commission a major orchestral work about climate change. The ASO's world premiere of Gerard Brophy's 'The Blue Thread', inspired by the River Murray, was performed at the Concert for the Earth at the Adelaide Town Hall on 27 November 2010. [6]  The Rann government proposed and arranged funding for two further ASO commissions, the first an orchestral tribute to the cricketer  Sir Donald Bradman , and the second commemorating the centenary of the ANZAC landings at Gallipoli. The world premiere of ' Our Don ' by  Natalie Williams  was performed by the ASO in August 2014. [7]  The world premiere of an ' ANZAC Requiem ' by composer  Iain Grandage  and librettist  Kate Mulvany  was performed on 22 April 2015. [8]