Aizawl College  is a college in  Mizoram ,  India . It is accredited with B Grade by NAAC [1]  and has 445 students currently studying in the college. [2]

Established ‘Aizawl College’ in 1975 by a team of  philanthropic  citizens meeting at the Office chamber of the then  Legislative Assembly  Speaker,  Dr. H.Thansanga , on the 13th. January 1975, Aizawl College (later renamed Government Aizawl College following its take-over by the State Government) was formally inaugurated by Pu  Ch. Chhunga , the first  Chief Minister of Mizoram . Classes started on the evening of 25.8.1975 with 350 students of  Pre University  Class and six Lecturers. It was up graded to Deficit Grant-in-aid status with effect from 1 November 1984 and became Government on 1 January 1989. The College was included under section 2(f) of the UGC Act 1956 [3]  and section 12(B) of the UGC Act 1956 with effect from 17.3.1987. While affiliated to the  NEHU , the college was one of the prominent members of the  NEHU  family. It is now affiliated to  Mizoram University .

Aizawl College started classes in the premises of the Govt. Boys’ M.E. School at  Sikulpuikawn ,  Mission Veng , in the evening. Two multi-storied buildings have been constructed for the College in the vacant lot between the school building and the main road which, by local standards, is quite impressive, but not quite sufficient to meet the ever-growing demands of today’s career-oriented education.

The College has two stream – Art and Commerce with eight different disciplines in Art Stream offering both general and honours.

The College has a good view of the surrounding ever-green hills of  Reiek  to the west and  Hmuifang  on the south in the background, and the well tended compounds of the  Mizo Presbyterian Synod  Headquarters in the foreground. The presence of a fully equipped Conference Center of the  Synod  in many ways alleviate the shortcoming of the college in organizing official functions. However, the college is soon to have a Hall of its own at the top of the two buildings on the fund made available by the honorable M.P.,  Pu Lalhmingliana , himself an alumnus of the College.