Rev.  Albert Edward Smith  (October 20, 1871—1947) was a  Canadian  religious leader and politician. A  social gospeller , Smith was for many years a minister in the Canadian  Methodist  Church before starting his own "People's Church". He served in the  Legislative Assembly of Manitoba  from 1920 to 1922 as a  Labour  representative. In 1925, he became a member of the  Communist Party of Canada .

Smith was born in  Guelph ,  Ontario , the son of William George Smith and Elizabeth Bildson, [1]   working-class  immigrants from  England . His family later moved to  Hamilton , where he developed an interest in religion after joining the Gore Street Methodist Church. After passing an oral examination to become a preacher, Smith was transferred to  MacGregor ,  Manitoba  in 1890 to begin field work. His appointment came from James Woodsworth, superintendent of Methodist missions for western Canada and father of  J.S. Woodsworth .

Smith was a vocal supporter of  Thomas Greenway 's  Liberal  government in Manitoba during the 1890s. During the  Manitoba Schools Question , he defended the Greenway government's decision to remove funding from French-language  denominational schools .

After three years' work as a probationer, Smith enrolled as a student for the ministry at Wesley College in  Winnipeg  in 1893. He was formally ordained to the ministry in 1897. He married Maude Mercy Rogers in 1898. [1]  After working in  Dauphin  and  Prince Albert ,  Saskatchewan , Smith was stationed at the MacDougall Memorial Methodist Church in north-end Winnipeg in 1902.

Smith's political views now turned to labour, and he spoke in support of  Labour  MP  Arthur Puttee 's re-election in the  1904 federal election .

Smith left Winnipeg in 1906, and moved to  Portage la Prairie . In 1910, he accepted ministerial work in  Nelson ,  British Columbia . He spoke at  Socialist Party  gatherings, and became acquainted with  Jack Johnstone , later a leading figure in the  Communist Party of the United States . Smith returned to Manitoba in 1913, to accept a position as minister of the First Methodist Church in  Brandon .

Smith was an advocate of church union with the  Presbyterians  throughout the 1910s. In 1925, this union came about via the creation of the  United Church of Canada .

Smith was asked to consider running in the  1917 federal election  as a supporter of  Robert Borden 's  Union government  of pro- conscription   Liberals  and  Conservatives . Although he rejected these requests, Smith's name was put forward for the Unionist nomination in  Brandon . Borden's government was supported by both mainstream labour and the Methodist Church, and some local government supporters believed Smith's name would aid their cause. Asked to make a speech at the nomination meeting, he informed the delegates that he had no confidence in either of the older parties, and did not believe the Union arrangement would make any difference. To the surprise of none present, Smith did not receive the nomination.

In 1917, Smith read the  Communist Manifesto  for the first time. He later claimed that the work was "like a revelation". Smith's religious views were, by his own admission, unorthodox for the standards of his age: he believed that the message of  Jesus  was "the proclamation of a new social order of human society", and rejected the "harsh theologies" of mainstream  Christian  churches. "In my sermons", he wrote, "no miracle was required to explain the birth of Jesus or his life and teachings [...] His name was to be cherished because He died as a leader of the people, for His principles and in protest against the unjust rulers of His day" (Albert Smith, All My Life, pp. 42–43). After reading the  Communist Manifesto , Smith eventually reached the conclusion that Jesus was a  Communist .

Smith's views had not yet developed to this stage in 1917, however, and he joined the social reformist  Dominion Labour Party  at the end of  World War I . Smith supported the strikers from his pulpit during the  Winnipeg General Strike  of 1919, and opened his church to Brandon civic workers who voted for a parallel strike in their city. As a member of the Brandon Trades and Labour Council, Smith provided extensive logistical support to Brandon's strike committee.

Not surprisingly, Smith's labour activities were opposed by more conservative figures in his Methodist church. At a special meeting of the church board held on May 26, 1919, a prominent church member moved that Smith "be restrained from any further preaching in First Church". No formal charges were made against him, and the motion was withdrawn. Nonetheless, his role as Brandon's Methodist minister had become untenable. On June 8, he announced the formation of a new People's Church in the city.

In 1920, Smith was prevailed on to run for the provincial legislature as a labour candidate. He received the nomination of a local group called the "Brandon Labour Party", which was aligned with the Winnipeg branch of the Dominion Labour Party. He was successful in the  1920 provincial election , defeating Liberal incumbent  Stephen E. Clements  by 604 votes. Some of Smith's opponents blamed vote-splitting by the Liberals and Conservatives for his victory.

For the next two years, Smith sat with the labour parliamentary group led by  Fred Dixon  in the legislative opposition. Unlike other labour members, Smith did not join the  Independent Labour Party  when the Winnipeg branch of the Dominion Labour Party split in late 1920. In August 1921, he instead attended a meeting of the Winnipeg Trades and Labour Council which led to the creation of the  Canadian Labour Party . While joining the CLP took Smith on a different path from his co-legislators, he remained a member of the labor parliamentary group.

Labour's political support in Manitoba had declined somewhat by the  1922 provincial election . Smith lost his seat to  John Edmison , who ran as a "fusion" candidate of the local Liberals and Conservatives. No longer receiving a salary as a Methodist minister or  Member of the Legislative Assembly  (MLA), Smith experienced financial difficulties in Brandon and decided to return to Ontario. He moved to Ontario in 1923, and immediately started a People's Church in  Toronto .

Smith was also involved in the Forum Committee of the local Labour Temple, and became a prominent member of the Canadian Labour Party in the city. Unlike  James Simpson , Smith supported opening the CLP to members of the newly formed  Communist Party of Canada .

Smith's personal philosophy continued to develop in this period, and in January 1925 he made the decision to join the Communist Party himself. His membership in the party was confirmed at a small upstairs room at 8 Gerrard Street East in Toronto, where a meeting of the party was held. He later explained his decision to a  Toronto Star  reporter by arguing that communism was a part of man's social evolution. Smith remained a member of the Communist Party for the rest of his life. Still a prominent figure in Toronto, he often defended the Communist Party against threats from hostile governments. He became a prominent organizer for the  Canadian Labour Defence League  across Canada in the 1920s, and served as its general secretary until it was shut down by the Canadian government in 1940.

He campaigned for the  Canadian House of Commons  in the  1925 federal election  as a candidate of the CLP in the northern Ontario riding of  Port Arthur—Thunder Bay . He finished fourth, with 1,363 votes. The winner was  William Fitzgerald Langworthy  of the  Conservative Party . At the time of the election, Smith described his occupation as "educationalist". He ran again in the  1926 election , and finished third with 1,382 votes. The winner was Conservative  Donald James Cowan .

Smith ran for municipal office in  Toronto  during this period. In 1925, he ran for  alderman  in Ward Seven as a candidate of the Labour Representation Political Association, a broad-tent group aligned with the Canadian Labour Party. He was defeated, and lost a second time in 1926. He also ran as a candidate of the Ontario division of the CLP in the  1926 provincial election , receiving 416 votes in  Hamilton Centre . The winner on that occasion was  Thomas Jutten  of the  Ontario Conservative Party . In the  1930 federal election  he ran as an independent candidate in  Fort William  winning 594 votes.

During the late 1920s, Smith became a prominent opponent of  Trotskyism  within the Communist Party of Canada. He supported the removal of  Maurice Spector  and  Jack MacDonald  from the CPC, and endorsed  Tim Buck , a strong supporter of  Joseph Stalin , to become the party's new leader in 1929. In his autobiography, Smith accused  Trotsky  of attempting to betray the  Russian Revolution , alleging that he had been in the "in the service of British agents" in 1926.

With the Canadian Labour Party falling into disarray, Smith returned to northern Ontario for the  federal election of 1930  to contest  Fort William  as an independent candidate. He received 594 votes, finishing third. The winner was  Robert James Manion , who later served as leader of the federal Conservative Party.

Smith visited the  Soviet Union  for the first time in 1932, and wrote favourably of the experience upon his return. In July 1936, he traveled to  Spain  during the  Spanish Civil War  as an emissary of the "Friends of the  Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion ".

Smith was one of Tim Buck's most vocal defenders in the early 1930s, when Buck was detained and nearly killed in the  Kingston Penitentiary . In the  1934 provincial election , Smith ran as a candidate of the  Ontario Communist Party  against Conservative  Premier   George Henry  in the constituency of  York East . He finished fourth, though still polling a respectable 664 votes. Later in 1934, Smith polled a surprisingly high 8,500 votes for  Mayor of Toronto .

Returning again to northern Ontario, Smith ran for the House of Commons as a candidate of the Communist Party candidate in the  1935 federal election , receiving 1,161 votes for a fourth-place finish in  Port Arthur . The winner was  Clarence Decatur Howe  of the Liberal Party.

Smith largely curtailed his political activities after this time, though he remained an active figure within the Communist Party. He returned to Manitoba for the  1945 federal election , and campaigned for the  Labor-Progressive Party  (as the Communist Party had renamed itself) in his old riding of  Brandon . He received 497 votes, finishing fourth. The winner was Liberal  James Ewen Matthews .

Smith's autobiography,  All My Life , was published posthumously in 1949. The work chronicles his religious and political evolution, and gives extensive consideration to the Communist Party's struggles of the 1930s. Interestingly,  Joseph Stalin  is never mentioned by name in this book.

To the end of his life, Smith argued that his beliefs were a reflection of the message promoted by Jesus of Nazareth.

A.E. Smith's son,  Stewart Smith , was a leading member of the Communist Party in his own right.