Another Brick in the Wall: The Opera  is an  opera  by  composer  Julien Bilodeau and  librettist   Roger Waters , based on the  concept album   The Wall  (1979) by the  progressive rock  band  Pink Floyd , of which Waters is a founding member. It premiered at  Opéra de Montréal  in March 2017, and will be produced by  Cincinnati Opera  in the summer of 2018.  [1]

Pierre Dufour , former general director of  Opéra de Montréal , wrote to  Pink Floyd  co-founder and songwriter  Roger Waters  about the idea of an opera based on the  Pink Floyd   concept album   The Wall  (1979). Waters said that he replied to Dufour with a "rather pompous" letter which claimed that any conversion of  rock music  into  orchestral  music always became an "unmitigated disaster." However, the production team sent Waters computer-generated renditions of a few of composer Julien Bilodeau's pieces from the opera, and Waters was convinced to join and support the production as the  librettist . Waters said he was "very moved" by the music and went into the project with "great enthusiasm." The opera premiered at  Opéra de Montréal  as part of the city of  Montréal's  375th-anniversary celebration. Due to unprecedented sales, the  Opéra de Montréal  added three performances of the opera on top of the initial seven performances.  [2]   [3]

The opera's plot is taken directly from the 1982 movie  The Wall . A musician named Pink reflects on his lonely childhood through a swirl of flashbacks and chemically-induced hallucinations. He watches as he constructs a symbolic wall around his life to cope with the death of his father, his overbearing mother, his depression, his drug addiction, and other emotional experiences. As he ages, his madness intensifies, and he hallucinates himself as a dictator and his concert audience as a  neo-Nazi  rally. This hallucination drives him to imagine a judge ruling him innocent, setting him free, and ordering the wall to be taken down. [4]

In  Another Brick in the Wall: The Opera ,  composer  Julien Bilodeau shapes and builds upon the original music of  Pink Floyd's   album   The Wall . While the album's lyrics, songs, and song order are maintained,  Pink Floyd's  original musical  themes  are extended by  orchestral  variations and interludes within the opera. [5] [6]

According to  Cincinnati Opera 's Harry T. Wilks Artistic Director Evans Mirageas,  Another Brick in the Wall  is not a  rock opera , but rather a standard opera, scored for eight soloists, 48 chorus members and a 70-piece orchestra. [4] [7]

The critical reception of this opera was somewhat mixed. Kory Grow of  Rolling Stone  said that the production team "[t]ransformed rock and roll into pure opera," and that this opera is "here to stay." [2]   Musical Toronto' s Jennifer Liu noted that  Another Brick in the Wall: The Opera  "shines a glaring light on a society which grapples with conflicting models of openness to the world," and that the opera is an "immersive ride for the audience." [8]  At the same time, though, Arthur Kaptainis of  Montreal Gazette  called the opera "a sullen, gloomy flop given the appearance of success." [9]  Graham Strahle from  Music Australia  added that this opera is "the perfect way" to "bring in new audiences outside [of opera's] traditional base."  [10]