Ardshinbank [4] , is an armenian  bank . The full name of the bank is "Industrial Construction Bank" closed joint-stock company.

The bank was founded in December, 2002. In February 2003 it received a banking license no. 83 (dated 25.02.03). [5]  Initially the bank was named "Ardshininvestbank". In 2003 it has also acquired a significant portion of the assets and liabilities of OJSC "Ardshinbank" and "Armagrobank" CJSC together with their branch networks. In November 2014 it was rebranded into "Ardshinbank" CJSC. [6]

It is a universal financial and credit institution offering a full range of banking services. Among the priorities of the bank's activities are such as project financing of large corporate customers, primarily in the strategic industries and energy sector of  Armenia , as well as lending to small and medium-sized businesses, emission and service of plastic cards, e-banking, international money transfers.

The bank has a large branch network: 70 branches in Yerevan, the regions of  Armenia  and in  Artsakh , and one representative office in  Paris , France. [7] [8] [9]

Ardshinbank assigned ratings from two international rating agencies -  Moody’s [10]  and  Fitch . [11]

Founders: “Rasco-Armenia” CJSC, “Center for Business Investments” LLC Shareholders: “Center for Business Investments” LLC, “International; Business Center” CO CJSC, physical persons. The sole beneficiary of Ardshinbank is  Karen Safaryan .

The participant of the securities market based on open-ended, tripartite contracts between the Central Bank, the Ministry of Economy and Finance of the  Republic of Armenia  and Ardshininvestbank, as well as the agent of government bonds market. The first private entity in Armenia to issue eurobonds in the amount US $100 million (in formats RegS/144A). [12] [13] [14] [15]

Member of  Union of Banks of Armenia ,  Armenian-Georgian Association of Business Cooperation ,  NASDAQ OMX ARMENIA , [16]  settlement system of the RA Central Depository, affiliated member of  Master Card / Europay , principal member of  Visa International  payment system, shareholder of  SWIFT  International Financial Telecommunication System, “Artsakh HEK” OJSC, full member and shareholder of “ArCa” processing company.

On October 7, 2016 the  Financial Industrial Corporation "Region" , whose sole shareholder is Karen Safaryan, the well-known russian businessman, the sole beneficiary and the Chairman of the Board of "Ardshinbank" CJSC, has acquired 100% shares of "Areximbank-Gazprombank Group" CJSC from its sole shareholder, the russian  Gazprombank .

Later in accordance with the Armenian legislation has begun the process of merger of Areximbank to Ardshinbank.

Programs of German-Armenian Fund:

Programs of the International Fund for Agricultural Development:

Program of  National Center for Small and Medium Entrepreneurship  Support "From Water to Market” program of Millennium Challenge Fund Program of stabilization of economy in the framework of RF intergovernmental loan National Mortgage Company,  OFID ,  CSOB ,  IFC ,  Landesbank ,  Atlantic forfaiting ,  KBC ,  WBC .

2005

2005-2006

2009

2010

2014