Asbury Harpending  (September 14, 1839 – January 26, 1923), an adventurer and financier in  San Francisco ,  California ,  Mexico , and  New York City .

Harpending was born in  Hopkinsville  in  Christian County  in southwestern  Kentucky . At the age of fifteen, he was sent to college but within the year he ran away to join the  filibuster  of General  William Walker , to  Nicaragua  but his party was intercepted by American officials. Escaping the authorities he made his way home. His father decided to give him money and send him to California.

Harpending made his early fortune mining in California and in Mexico prior to the  American Civil War . [1]

In 1861, he joined in a  conspiracy  to seize  San Francisco  and create a "Pacific Republic" in California and  Oregon , but the movement failed because of the loyalty and precautions of  Colonel  ( Brevet   Brigadier General )  Albert Sidney Johnston . Later in 1863, after traveling secretly to  Richmond , Harpending obtained a  letter of marque  and returned to join with other California members of the  Knights of the Golden Circle  in San Francisco to outfit the  schooner   J. M. Chapman , [2]  as a  Confederate privateer  in  San Francisco Bay . Their object was to raid commerce on the Pacific coast to capture and carry gold and silver shipments back to support the Confederacy. Their attempt was detected and they were seized on the night of their intended departure by the  USS Cyane , revenue officers and San Francisco police. The conspirators were tried and found guilty of treason. Asbury Harpending, and the other leaders were each sentenced to ten years in prison confined at  Alcatraz . A few months later President Lincoln issued an amnesty proclamation granting full pardon to all political prisoners upon the condition that they take and keep the oath of allegiance. Harpending was given his freedom in February 1864. [3] [4]

By the end of the war he was involved in mining, real estate and railroads, and founded the town of  Havilah, California , which became a boom town in 1865. After he was involved in the  Diamond hoax of 1872 , he sold out in California and retired to Kentucky. However, after a few years, he moved to  New York City  and became involved in investment and speculation on  Wall Street . In 1913, Harpending published his biography,  The Great Diamond Hoax and Other Stirring Episodes in the Life of Asbury Harpending - An Epic of Early California . [5]

Harpending died in 1923.

The actor  Vaughn Taylor  played Harpending in the 1965 episode "Raid on the San Francisco Mint" of the  syndicated   western   television series   Death Valley Days , hosted by  Ronald W. Reagan , who was cast in the starring role of banker  William Chapman Ralston , the founder of the  Bank of California . [6]