Bart Franklin Hester  (born December 1977), is a  real estate   businessman  in  Bentonville ,  Arkansas , who is a  Republican  member of the  Arkansas State Senate  from District 1, which includes  Benton County .

Hester graduated with a  Bachelor of Science  in business management from the  Sam M. Walton College of Business  at the  University of Arkansas , where he was a member of the  Arkansas Razorbacks   baseball  team. [1]

Hester and his wife, the former Ashley Brooke Dorsey (born 1978), have three children, Brooklyn, Addey Jo, and Nik. They reside in  Cave Springs . Hester is a deacon of the First  Baptist  Church of Bentonville. He is a member of the  National Rifle Association  and the Arkansas Realtors Association. [1]

Hester was elected to the Senate from the revised District 1 in 2012, when he defeated fellow Republican Tim Summers, 4,506 to 3,869 in the  primary election . He was unopposed in the  general election . The previous District 1 senator, Republican  Johnny Key , was transferred to the revised District 17. Hester's Senate term expires at the end of 2016. [2]  Hester received support for his campaign from  Americans for Prosperity , a  Tea Party  political  advocacy group  backed by  David H. Koch  and  Charles Koch  (often collectively referred to as The Koch Brothers). [3]

Hester serves on the Arkansas Legislative Council and the  Arkansas Game and Fish Commission  Oversight Committee. He is assigned to these Senate committees: (1) Budget, (2) Children and Youth (vice chair), (3) City, County, and Local Affairs, (4) Revenue and Tax, (5) Rules, Resolutions and Memorials. [1]

Hester opposes  abortion , having voted to ban the practice after twenty weeks of gestation or whenever fetal heartbeat is determined. [4]

In 2013, Hester joined the Senate majority to amend  state income tax  rates and to reduce the amount of weekly  unemployment compensation  benefits. He co-sponsored legislation to test the recipients of unemployment compensation for illegal use of  narcotics . He voted successfully to override  Governor   Mike Beebe 's  veto  of a bill to require photo identification when one casts a ballot in Arkansas. He voted against legislation to make the office of prosecuting attorney in Arkansas  nonpartisan . He co-sponsored legislation to permit handguns to be carried on church properties and to forbid the release of information on the holders of  concealed carry  permits. He voted to allow university staff to carry concealed weapons. Hester supported legislation to permit the sale of  unpasteurized  whole milk within his state. [4]

Hester endorsed former  U.S. Representative   Asa Hutchinson  in the  2014 gubernatorial election . [5]  Hutchinson was handily defeated by Beebe in the  2006  election, but won the governorship in 2014 in a second run for the office.

In early 2015, Hester sponsored the  Intrastate Commerce Improvement Act , intended to supersede local gay rights laws, and it became law. Several cities and towns have passed  LGBT  anti-discrimination ordinances in spite of the act, however. His "gay-hating" legislation earned Hester a nomination for "Worst Person in the World" . [6]

In March 2015, Hester called for  Springdale  Police Chief Kathy O'Kelley to be fired following the release of a 2006 SPD police report containing accusations that  Josh Duggar  (of the TV show  19 Kids and Counting )  molested five underage girls, including his siblings . Springdale Mayor Doug Sprouse made a statement that the public disclosure was required under the  Arkansas Freedom of Information Act . [7]  On June 30, 2015, Hester publicly stated that "It's a good day when you can pick up 1,000 rounds at @Walmart Bentonville" on Twitter, and posted a photo of the box containing the 1000-round purchase he was making. [8]

During the  2016 Republican Party presidential primaries , Hester chaired  Marco Rubio 's Arkansas campaign. [9]  Rubio finished third in the March 1 Arkansas primary [10]  and suspended his campaign on March 15. [11]

During the fiscal session, Governor  Asa Hutchinson  proposed "Arkansas Works", an expansion of the private option using federal Medicaid money to assist over 267,000 low-income Arkansans to obtain private health insurance and reduce care reduced uncompensated care costs at hospitals across the state. The measure also transfers funding to the  Arkansas State Highway and Transportation Department  (AHTD) necessary for AHTD to meet matching requirements to receive Arkansas's full allocation of federal highway funds. [13]  Hester became a vocal, leading opponent of Arkansas Works, and lead a "rump" group of state senators to block funding the initiative. Although the measure gained the required simple majorities to pass (70-30 in the House and 25-10 in the Senate, with Hester opposed), rules to acquire funding for the measure require a three-fourths majority. [13]

A vote on April 14 resulted in the measure failing to achieve the required three-fourths majority, passing 95-0 in the House but failing 25-10 in the Senate with Hester and nine other Republicans opposing the measure. Hester has said the $2.6 billion of state revenues allocated to AHTD is "adequate". Hester offered cuts to the public television  Arkansas Educational Television Network  (AETN),  War Memorial Stadium  in Little Rock, and business incentives to fund some state programs, to which Hutchinson has said, "I don't think those are realistic proposals". [3] [12]  Hester said a competing proposal will be forthcoming from the Arkansas Works opponents. [12]

Bart Franklin Hester 
2013–