Mali

Azawad

Tuareg rebellion (2012) :

2012 Malian coup d'état

Internal conflict in Azawad :

Foreign intervention :

2014 fighting:

Other incidents:

The Amachach military base in Tessalit was defended by roughly 800 Malian soldiers commanded by Colonel Kassim Goita, with 1,500 refugees being mostly  Tuareg  women and children. The  International Committee of the Red Cross  was sent to help evacuate civilians and military families, but despite the approval of the  MNLA , Malian authorities delayed the operation and it was never executed as a humanitarian source. Other Malian military forces in the region of  Tessalit  were led by Colonels' Didier Dacko, Ould Meydou, and the well respected  Tuareg  commander El Hagi Ag Gamou. [2]

On 18 January,  Tessalit  itself came under attack by both  MNLA  and  Ansar Dine  rebels. According to Malian soldiers, fighters from  AQIM  were present. [3]

On 22 January, the MNLA announced they had surrounded the Malian army base in Tessalit and expected all foreign military trainers to evacuate the premises. The Amachach military camp is located about fifteen kilometers from Tessalit itself. In a separate clash with the Malian army, two rebels were killed and a vehicle destroyed. By then, the number of MNLA fighters reached around 600 with reinforcements arriving from  Libya  and  Niger . [1]

On 10 February, the Malian army launched an offensive to relieve the garrison in Tessalit, after a two-week-long siege. The army deployed 107 all-terrain vehicles, six  BRDM  armored vehicles, and combat helicopters piloted by foreign mercenaries. The MNLA became aware of Malian army movements in the area, launching their own offensive, eventually meeting the Army in the village of  Tinsalane , 20 kilometers south of Tessalit. According to the MNLA, the planned transport convoy carrying Malian soldiers from the towns of  Kidal  and  Anefif  to strengthen the garrison of Tessalit, was ambushed by a brigade of the MNLA. After several hours of fighting, Malian forces fled, leaving 17 dead and 14 prisoners, including their commander Yusuf Ag Bougara, along with six vehicles destroyed and four captured. According to residents of  In-Kahlil  located along the border with  Algeria , dozens of rebel vehicles filled with injured fighters were accepted in Algerian hospitals. The Malian government announced the same day, that the army defeated the rebels killing a hundred and capturing 50 which differs from the MNLA's previous claim of only losing four men. The overall outcome of the confrontation is disputed over with both sides, but it seems to have been more in favor of the rebels, as a month later Tessalit fell. [2] [4]

On 29 February, the Malian defenders of Amachach military base launched several raids of their own in an attempt to break the rebel siege, with some elements of outside reinforcements. The MNLA cited that none of their fighters were killed during the clashes where as the Malian army sustained losses. Clashes continued through 1 March, when the Malian army attacked MNLA positions surrounding the base, but failed in any way to diverge the rebels from the siege. [5]

On 2 March, the MNLA announced that a total of 32 Malian soldiers have been killed, 20 wounded, and three vehicles destroyed in clashes over the past two weeks, leaving only seven dead and seven taken as prisoners in their ranks. [6]

On 4 March, the Malian army launched a second attempt to break the rebel siege of Tessalit, by sending reinforcements backed by combat helicopters. The attack was eventually repulsed after twelve hours of fighting, but a helicopter was able to reach the Amachach military base to help collect the dead and wounded soldiers, with some bodies already in a state of decomposing. [7]  On 8 March, according to local sources in the town of  In-Khalil , eight MNLA combatants died of the wounds they received in clashes with the army, with a ninth being taken to an Algerian hospital in  Bordj Badji Mokhtar .

On 10 March, in the early evening, the MNLA launched their final assault on camp Amachach. Fighting continued until 11 March, when the Malian army fled their military base, leaving behind hundreds of weapons, mortars, rocket launchers, machine guns, and even tanks. Around 57 Malian soldiers, five officers (two commanders, two lieutenants, and one captain) were captured, with 10 vehicles and two BRDM's recovered. An important military arsenal along with a BRDM were both destroyed. The Malian army talked that their forces made a strategic withdrawal and evacuation of the Amachach military camp to shelter to civilians who had sought refuge and to prevent a massacre. [8]

After the rebel victory, the Malian army retreated to  Gao  taking with them close to 800 people, mostly  Black Africans  with only 30 being  Tuareg . The  MNLA  released a statement promising that they will treat their prisoners according to the  Geneva Conventions of 1949 , with a sick Malian soldier being handed over to  Algerian  authorities for care and 20 military families were handed over to the  International Committee of the Red Cross . The Malian government responded to their defeat by calling on the International Community, saying that the humanitarian situation is deteriorating with crimes being committed by the rebels against civilians. In the statement it also indicated, that the army fled  Tessalit  in part that it was unnecessary casualties to continue the prolonged battle. [7] [8]

Coordinates :  20°15′26″N   0°59′28″E ﻿ / ﻿ 20.2572°N 0.9911°E ﻿ /  20.2572; 0.9911