The  BBC News Summary  is a news update created by  BBC News  originally to target the professional and working market. It is broadcast every Monday to Friday at 8:00pm and 9:00pm on  BBC One .

Like other  BBC News  bulletins it is presented by a sole newsreader, on Monday to Thursday it is usually  Ellie Crisell  and on Friday  Riz Lateef . After a minute of brief national and international news, a regional presenter provides 30 seconds of regional news headlines and a brief local weather forecast; on BBC One HD in England a national weather forecast is broadcast instead due to there being no regional variations. The 9pm edition is a pre-recorded preview to  BBC News at Ten .

Originally BBC news summaries were broadcast during the day and were launched as part of the BBC's new daytime TV service. The first broadcasts took place on 8 December 1986. Lasting for three minutes, the hourly or near-hourly bulletins formed the backbone of this service. Morning summaries were broadcast on BBC1 and early afternoon summaries were transmitted on BBC2. Each bulletin was followed by a weather forecast. The final afternoon news summary of the day was followed by a regional news bulletin. In October 1990, regional hourly news bulletins were introduced and were broadcast immediately after the BBC1 morning summaries. By the end of the 1990s the summaries were broadcast less frequently and they were phased out altogether during the 2000s.

These summaries are not to be confused with generic BBC News bulletins broadcast over BBC One and BBC Two at weekends and holidays.

In May 2007  Natasha Kaplinsky  and  Suzanne Virdee  presented the show during its initial pilot in the  Midlands .

In October 2007  Natasha Kaplinsky  left  BBC News , and  Kate Silverton  was announced as the launch presenter. Initially, the presenter of the  BBC News at Six  and  BBC News at Ten  presented Friday editions, but  Ellie Crisell  later became the Friday presenter.

In February 2008 Silverton left the update to present  BBC News at One  and was replaced by Crisell, who took maternity leave the following month. During this time  Riz Lateef  and  Celina Hinchcliffe  presented the update, while others including  Sophie Long  and  Luisa Baldini  also appeared.

On 21 April 2008 the summary got a new logo and graphics as part of a BBC News relaunch. In October 2008 Crisell returned to the update. Riz Lateef became the new Friday and relief presenter.

On 18 March 2013, the programme moved to  Broadcasting House , along with the BBC News Channel and the other BBC One bulletins, and began broadcasting in  high-definition .

Main presenter  Ellie Crisell  left the  summary  for  South East Today  and since then multiple presenters have been presenting in a rotation, this consists of:

Monday & Tuesday:

Wednesday

Thursday: (alternating)

Friday:

If there is no position before the years of being a presenter, this newsreader was either a relief presenter or occasional stand-in presenter.

The bulletin faced criticism from certain quarters with BBC News being accused of " dumbing down " their news content by condensing the day's news into a brief format.