Beinn Bhàn  is a  Scottish  mountain situated in the  Lochaber  region of the  Highland Council Area . It stands 6 miles (10 km) north-west of  Spean Bridge . The hill is not to be confused with another and better known  Beinn Bhàn  on the  Applecross  peninsular.

Beinn Bhàn reaches a height of 796 metres (2612 feet) and qualifies as a  Corbett  and a  Marilyn . The hill stands in Glen Loy, a minor side valley of the  Great Glen  and hill walkers will sometimes climb Beinn Bhàn along with another Glen Loy Corbett, Meall a' Phubuill to give a full days walking . The hill's name translates from the  Scottish Gaelic  language as "White Hill", there are no natural features which could give this name and local knowledge says that the hill is so named because snow lies on Beinn Bhàn earlier than any other hill in the district and it is this well-defined whiteness which led to the naming of the hill. [2]  Much of the area around Beinn Bhàn was used for the training of  British Commandos  and  United States Army Rangers  during  World War II  using the training depot at  Achnacarry Castle  on the NE foothills. [3] [4]

Standing in a region which has some of the highest mountains in the  UK , Beinn Bhàn can be easily overlooked, however it is conspicuous in the view from the  Commando Memorial  at Spean Bridge, where its long NW ridge is well seen rising from Glen Mallie to the summit ridge overlooking the Great Glen. The hill has three notable  corries  on its slopes, the south facing Coire Mhuilinn (corrie of the mill) above Glen Loy is smooth and grassy, while the two north facing corries of Coire Bhotrais (corrie of the rough miry holes) and Coire Dubh (black corrie) are more rocky and steeper in nature. All three corries bite significantly and high into the hill to give a two kilometre long narrow curving summit ridge which is above the 750 metre contour for its entire length. [5]  The highest point stands at the eastern end of the ridge and there are two lesser and unnamed tops, both with a height of 771 metres situated at the midpoint and western end. 200 metres west of the main summit are several  springs  which emerge on the summit ridge and are the origins of the stream which flows down Coire Mhuilinn. [6]

The highest point is marked by a  trig point  and a substantial cairn. The hill has a  prominence  of 495 metres making it a fine view point. The view north takes in  Loch Arkaig  and its surrounding mountains but the highlight of the vista is south towards the  Ben Nevis  range, giving a fine prospect which looks straight up the valley of the Allt a Mhuillin and shows Britain's highest mountain to fine effect along with the neighbouring  Càrn Mòr Dearg  and  Aonach Mòr .

The most popular route of ascent and one which is recommended by most guide books approaches from the south, starting at the Inverskilavulin holiday development in Glen Loy. This route uses the ridges on both sides of Coire Mhuilinn for ascent and descent. It is possible to approach Beinn Bhàn from the north, starting on the shore of Loch Arkaig with the possibility of using Invermallie bothy as a base. [7]  This route is hindered by the presence of  forestry   plantations  and thick heather on the lower slopes, when this is overcome it is then possible to reach the summit ridge by following the stream up Coire Dubh or using the ridges on either side. [8]

Coordinates :  56°55′24″N   5°03′13″W ﻿ / ﻿ 56.923456°N 5.053625°W ﻿ /  56.923456; -5.053625