Beng Mealea  or  Bung Mealea  ( Khmer :  ប្រាសាទបឹងមាលា , its name means "lotus pond" [1] ) is a temple in the  Angkor Wat  period [2] :118–119  located 40 km east of the main group of temples at  Angkor ,  Cambodia , on the ancient royal highway to  Preah Khan Kompong Svay .

It was built as a  Hindu  temple, but there are some carvings depicting  buddhist  motifs. [1]  Its primary material is  sandstone  and it is largely unrestored, with trees and thick brush thriving amidst its towers and courtyards and many of its stones lying in great heaps. For years it was difficult to reach, but a road recently built to the temple complex of  Koh Ker  passes Beng Mealea and more visitors are coming to the site, as it is 77 km from  Siem Reap  by road.

The history of the temple is unknown and it can be dated only by its architectural style, identical to Angkor Wat, so scholars assumed it was built during the reign of king  Suryavarman II  in the early 12th century. [1]  Smaller in size than  Angkor Wat , the king's main monument, Beng Mealea nonetheless ranks among the  Khmer empire 's larger temples: the gallery which forms the outer enclosure of the temple is 181 m by 152 m. [3]  It was the center of a town, surrounded by a moat 1025 m by 875 m large and 45 m wide. [1]

Beng Mealea is oriented toward the east, but has entranceways from the other three cardinal directions. The basic layout is three enclosing galleries around a central sanctuary, collapsed at present. The enclosures are tied with "cruciform cloisters", like Angkor Wat. Structures known as libraries lie to the right and left of the avenue that leads in from the east. There is extensive carving of scenes from  Hindu  mythology, including the Churning of the Sea of Milk and  Vishnu  being borne by the bird god  Garuda . Causeways have long balustrades formed by bodies of the seven-headed  Naga  serpent.

It was built mostly of  sandstone : Beng Mealea is only 7 km far from the angkorian sandstone quarries of  Phnom Kulen , as the crow flies. Presumably sandstone blocks used for Angkor were transported along artificial water canals and passed from here. [1]  Despite of lack of information, the quality of architecture and decorations has drawn the attention of French scholars just from its discovery. [4] [5] [6]

This site was added to the  UNESCO   World Heritage  Tentative List on September 1, 1992 in the Cultural category  [1] .

Circular moat of Beng Mealea.

Nāga  of Beng Mealea.

One of the raised  libraries  of the outer enclosure.

The fine carvings on the pediments.

Blind door, lintel and pediment in Angkor Wat style.

The magnificent five-headed  nagas  of the cruciform terraces.

Here vegetations rules.

Fallen lintel showing the Churning of the Sea of Milk.