Koda Kumi Remix Album 2006

Best: First Things  (stylized as  Best ~first things~ ) is the first  compilation  album released by  Japanese   pop  singer  Kumi Koda . It debuted at #1 on  Oricon , giving her first number-one album, and became her longest charting album, staying on the charts for 124 weeks. The album included all of her  a-sides  released since her debut in 2000 with  Take Back  and became one of her highest selling albums, selling nearly two million copies as of 2007.

To help promote the album, Kumi held a special event at  Shibuya Station , where fans would replicate the dress she wore on the album's cover. Winners received either a signed copy of the album, or Kumi's first  concert   DVD ,  Secret First Class Limited Live .

The album was released in both 2CD and 2CD+DVD, each with different cover art. Limited editions contained the bonus track,  the meaning of peace ,  which was previously released on Kumi's single  love across the ocean .  Unlike the version released for the  Song Nation project  Kumi performed with  Korean  singer-songwriter  BoA , this version was not a ballad and, instead, was a  dance pop  track.

Upon its release, the album received generally positive reviews from both critics and fans, with many praised Kumi's vocals and maturity as her music career progressed.

Best ~first things~  is  Japanese   singer-songwriter  Kumi Koda's first compilation album and contained all of her singles from  Take Back  (2000) to  Promise/Star  (2005). The three singles leading up to the album's release were  Butterfly ,  flower  and the aforementioned  Promise/Star.  The album did contain one new track: the first song  No Tricks  (styled as  NO TRICKS ), which received a remix seven years later on her 2012 album  Beach Mix . [1]

Best ~first things~  became Kumi's first album to chart at #1 on the Oricon Weekly charts and was her longest charting album, remaining on the charts for 124 weeks – over two years. [2]  The album also became one of her highest selling albums, having sold nearly two million copies as reported in 2007. [3]

The album was released in 2CD and 2CD+DVD with the limited editions of both versions containing the bonus track  the meaning of peace  from the  Song Nation  project on the second CD and a "special video mix" on the DVD. [4] [5]  However, this version of  the meaning of peace  is Koda Kumi's "solo version," which had been released on her single  Love Across the Ocean .  The first press of the 2CD+DVD came with a slipcover and a deluxe booklet. [6]

It is speculated that it was the release and promotions of  Best ~first things~  that had saved her career. Not only had the album sold nearly two million copies and become her first #1 album on  Oricon , but it also secured the number one spot for the Best Selling Female Album in 2005. [7]

Best ~first things~  was released in three editions:

Limited editions of all versions came with the bonus track on the second CD, Koda Kumi's solo version of  the meaning of peace ,  and the bonus video  "Special Mix Video from "Best ~first Things~". " The "special edition" came with a deluxe booklet, alongside the lyrical booklet.

To help promote her album, on September 21, 2005, Koda Kumi held a special costume exhibition in  Shibuya  at  Shibuya Station  and an event where fans would try their best to replicate the dress Kumi wore on the cover of the album. During the event, fans were able enter a lottery for a chance to win a signed copy of  Best ~first things~  or her first concert DVD  Secret ~First Class Limited Live~ . [9]

While Best ~first things~ may not convert the casual listener into a being a fan of Koda Kumi, it has its moments of brilliance. Its ballads are touching and emotive while many of the upbeat dance tracks are quite infectious. It does do its job of introducing the listener to Koda Kumi as an artist and plots her early journey from newcomer to superstar.

Upon its release,  Best ~first things~  received favorable reviews from both fans and critics.

"If there is one thing to be said about Best ~first things~ it is that it shows Koda’s growth as a musician," Taylor Cordingly of "Fierce Divas and Femme Fatales" said upon its release. Taylor says how her earlier work on  affection  flowed together, but many of the songs sounded too familiar and were difficult to differentiate. They go on to say how her following albums,  grow into one ,  feel my mind  and  secret  showed more of her growth and vocal range. The newer tracks on the album,  Promise  and  flower,  were praised for her vocals and the sound in music.

Other reviewers said how it was the "perfect album" to introduce Koda Kumi to those who had not heard her music before and for people to hear her evolution of music. [10]

Tsuki at  Lost Wing , however, said that many of the tracks, though a-sides, were ones to "skip over." They also go on to say that, despite spanning five years of Koda Kumi's music, "I truthfully found very little growth of her as an artist. She still has yet to reach her potential." [11]

“I’m glad I didn’t give up . . . I could finally see a stage sparkling in the spotlight. . . Every single day felt like a dream." – Koda Kumi

Koda Kumi talks in  KODA REKI  how 2005 became her happiest year, where her songs continued to top the charts and she was invited to music shows. She says her happiest moments were when she knew people were listening to her songs. By being invited to the Japan Record Awards and  Kōhaku Uta Gassen , being given several awards and performing on prestigious shows, she felt as though she was final able to repay the people who had been supporting her; namely, her parents.

2005 also gave boom to her  ero-kawaii  style and popularity. She said that, while she was proud to have the title, she was nervous of what her parents would think.

"When I saw my parents smiling happily, it was then, from the bottom of my heart, I was glad I stuck with my style." – Koda Kumi [12]

Oricon Sales Chart (Japan)