Blue Haven  is a suburb on the  Central Coast  of  New South Wales , Australia, located on  Pacific Highway  at Wallarah Creek. Its  local government area  is  Central Coast Council .

Blue Haven was once made up of several dirt roads (the main road being 'Roper Road', the only way in or out of Blue Haven at the time) and surrounded by  bushland . It's now made up of hundreds of streets and has 3 different main entries and exits. The  wetland  areas are now preserved areas. Blue Haven, in the past, would suffer from constant  bushfires  in the  dry season .

Before it was named  Blue Haven , the suburb was known as Blueridge Estate - and depending on where mail was sent, the northern area was  Doyalson  and the southern area was  Charmhaven .

Blue Haven is bounded by Pacific Highway to the east, the Doyalson Link Road (linking to the  Sydney-Newcastle Freeway ) to the north, Spring Creek to the west and Wallarah Creek to the south. Spring Creek and Wallarah Creek are connected to  Tuggerah Lake , one of Australia's largest coastal saltwater lakes.

Blue Haven contains a state primary school, Blue Haven Public School (No.4623), which commenced in 1999 and, as of 2 September 2008, had over 600 students from kindergarten to year 6, and 33 teaching and administrative staff. The neighbouring suburb of  San Remo  is home to Northlakes High School, which opened in 1981 and has over 1000 students.

There are several wetland areas located in the southern parts of the town. Blue Haven also has an Oval, skate park, basketball courts and a community centre located on Apsley Court.

The Community Centre incorporates an After School Care facility and a "Schools as Community Centre" that operates in conjunction with Blue Haven Public School.

There are also several parks and reserves located within the estate, these include:

In early 2016, an Aldi supermarket opened on the corner of Blue Haven Way and Roper Rd. Blue Haven previously had only one shop, Blueys Grocery, Takeaway & More Store located 2 White Swan Drive. The shop is now for lease and is bound to be back operating as a coffee/takeaway corner store again soon.

Blue Haven is served by two public transport routes, provided by Busways Wyong:

Blue Haven Raiders Junior Rugby League Club was established in 2006 by foundation members Brian Howden, Mark D'Silva and Mick & Jackie James.

Blue Haven entered the Central Coast competition in 2007 with 10 teams. Every year the Raiders have increased in size. In 2010, the Raiders expanded to 20 teams, 280 boys and girls participating from 6 to 16 years.

The Green Machine as they are affectionately known, will join the Central Coast Senior Rugby league Competition in 2011, entering two U/17 and one U/19 team. Many believe that the Raiders are not that far away from delivering the community a quality first grade rugby league team.

Blue Haven Raiders J.R.L.C visit www.bluehavenraiders.com.au