The  Paul Hamilton House , commonly referred to as the  Brick House Ruins , is the  ruin  of a 1725  plantation house  on  Edisto Island ,  South Carolina , that burned in 1929. It was designated a  National Historic Landmark  in 1970 for the unusual architecture of the surviving walls, which is based on part on  French Huguenot  architecture of the period. [3]

The house was constructed about 1725 for Paul Hamilton, a wealthy South Carolina planter, on  Edisto Island , one of the  Sea Islands  in what was then the  Province of South Carolina . [2]

The two- story  house was constructed with exterior walls of  brick  imported from  Boston , such brick being harder and denser than the local kind. The interior of the home was primarily constructed of locally produced  lumber  which had been aged seven years. Construction also utilized local  gravel  and  sand  brought to the site from the  Pon Pon . [4]

Its architectural design is in keeping with  American colonial architecture  but exhibits  French Huguenot  influence. [2]  Possibly a simplified copy of the c. 1675  Chateau de la Haye d'Esquermes  near  Loos les Lille ,  France , evidence of the French influence in its architecture is seen through many stucco enrichments to the exterior and its high-pitched roof. [4]

It served as the plantation house for a 300-acre (120 ha)  plantation . [2]  The estate was acquired in 1798 by the Jenkins family which maintains ownership to this day.

In 1929 the house caught fire, with its wooden portion being largely reduced to ashes and only its brick walls with  stuccoed   quoins  and  trim  remaining. [3]  Until that time, it had not been significantly altered.

The  ruin  was recorded photographically as part of the  Historic American Buildings Survey  of the  National Park Service  cataloged at the  Library of Congress  in both 1936 and 1939. [3] [5]

It was declared a  National Historic Landmark  and added to the  National Register of Historic Places  on 15 April 1970. [2]

The  South Carolina Department of Archives and History  published a summary of the site as a part of  South Carolina history . [4]  They describe it as an  artifact  of important early French influence in the Carolinas, considered a "stately and picturesque ruin in its own right." They cite the architecture of the outer walls as being "unique in this country." [4]

Following the fire of 1929, some stabilization was performed. Metal supports were used to brace some openings, but their expansion over time has actually damaged some of the material. In addition, the two chimneys (shown in the main photo above) had their top portions removed to prevent their damaging the walls in case of collapse. As of February 2013, the shell still stands, but the National Park Service considers it to be in an "emergency" condition due to major cracks and deformation of the south wall, with collapse likely if no remedial action is taken. [6]