" Call on Me " is a song by American singer  Janet Jackson  with guest vocals from American rapper  Nelly  from Jackson's ninth studio album,  20 Y.O.  (2006). It was written by  Jermaine Dupri ,  Johnta Austin ,  James Phillips ,  Cornell Haynes, Jr. ,  James Harris III and Terry Lewis , and produced by Dupri, Phillips, Jam and Lewis, in addition to Jackson. "Call on Me" was released as the album's  lead single  in June 19, 2006, by  Virgin Records . It is a mid-tempo ballad which talks about calling on a person when a friend or somebody to listen is needed. The song received mixed reviews from  music critics , although some picked it as one of the best tracks on the album, calling it a "lovely and elegant" ballad.

"Call on Me" was a moderate success commercially, becoming her most successful single in some countries since " All for You " in 2001. It peaked at number 25 on the US  Billboard  Hot 100 . Additionally, it spent two non-consecutive weeks at number one on the  Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs  chart, making it Jackson's sixteenth R&B chart-topper. Internationally, the song peaked inside the top-twenty in Ireland, Italy, New Zealand and the United Kingdom.

The accompanying  music video  for "Call on Me" was directed by  Hype Williams  and took ten days to be completed. It incorporates Indian, Asian, and African styles, with a mixture of outfits and hairstyles. Outfits worn in the video included a specially-designed Kimono, metal corset, and nine-inch platform heels. "Call on Me" is one of the most expensive music videos of all time, with a production cost of over $1,000,000 (US). Following its release, it was reported that the video was blacklisted by  MTV , following her incident at the  Super Bowl halftime show  in 2004, which was co-produced by the network.

After the infamous  Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy  in 2004, Janet released her eighth studio album,  Damita Jo  the same year. The album debuted at number two on  Billboard  200 , was certified Platinum by the  Recording Industry Association of America  (RIAA), and sold over three million copies worldwide. [2] [3] [4]  However, its singles received minimal airplay due to a  blacklist  of Jackson's music and videos on many music channels and radio formats caused by legalities surrounding the incident. [5]  Jackson then decided to start to work on a new project in the coming year, involving her then-fiancé, record producer  Jermaine Dupri , who was commissioned to executive produce the project, in addition to a number of other producers. She decided to create a modern record, while returning to  dance music , in the vein of her hit album,  Control  (1986). [6]  Producer  Jimmy Jam  revealed that while recording the album, Janet became more confident with her writing ability, doing the bulk of the writing. He also commented, "We're all kind of back in there doing it again together, which I really enjoy." It's the physical nature of sitting in the same room and really hashing it out. It's like, 'You're not going to leave until we have a lyric,' so it's fun." Janet and Jimmy both agreed that Dupri molded well into their tri due to him being a fan of Jam and Lewis' work and vice versa. [6]

During the sessions, "Call on Me" was written. For the song, Janet revealed that Nelly and Dupri had been in the studio alone working together, and came up with the record on their own. They called Jackson up, played it for her over the phone, and asked if she wanted to record it. Jackson obliged. [6]  Speaking about the song, Dupri said "It's a duet between her and Nelly. It's the jump-off. We don't just have a record that's just a Nelly and Janet record. I believe this record is gonna be one of the biggest records on radio this year. Outside of who it is, it's a well-put-together song." [7]  Dupri also commented about Nelly's addition to the song, saying:

"Nelly, I try to do what I do with my friends. Me and him had just come off the success of ' Grillz ' at the time I made this record. He was the person on my mind. "Especially since Janet only made records, not to disrespect  Q-Tip  or  Heavy D , but as far as popular rappers in this day and time,  Busta Rhymes  was the only one. We was trying to go to the radio and not do the typical R&B featured record. I was trying to be more creative and find somebody who can do melody as well as rap on the record. Nelly doesn't really rap on this song, he's singing. He has that different style. That's kind of what the record is. We see that enough: R&B with a rapper feature. That's why I call this a duet as opposed to a feature". [7]

The first single from  20 Y.O.  was thought to be released in February initially. [8]  However, it had an initial release date for May. [9]

"Call on Me" was written by  Jermaine Dupri ,  Johntá Austin ,  James Phillips ,  Nelly ,  Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , while production was handled by Janet Jackson, Dupri, Phillips, Jam and Lewis. [10]  It is a mid- tempo  ballad which  samples   The SOS Band 's 1983 song "Tell Me If You Still Care," also written and produced by  Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis . [10]  According to Dupri, lyrically, "It's really just a record about when you need a friend, somebody you need to talk to, just call on a person. It's a friend record. It ain't really a boyfriend/girlfriend record. The way Nelly and Janet are talking is more girlfriend/boyfriend, but it really goes out to friends." [7]

"Call on Me" garnered mixed reviews from  music critics . Andy Kellman of  Allmusic  picked "With U" as one of the album's best songs. [11]  Jon Pareles of  New York Times  called it a "tinkly-twinkly tune," [12]  while Thomas Inskeep of  Stylus Magazine  named it "a lovely little pillow of a midtempo ballad, with Janet singing off Nelly (who’s also singing, which he arguably does better than he raps)." [13]  Tammy La Gorce of  Amazon.com  described it as a "easy-beezy standout." [14]  Jeevan Panesar of  The Situation  picked the song as one of the "Top Three Tracks", praising "its playful melody, easy listening and warm energy," but ultimately, calling it "easily forgettable." [15]

Tracy E. Hopkins of  Barnes & Noble  wrote that the song "won't wow too many fans with its nursery rhyme-like." [16]  Spence D. of  IGN  was mixed, writing, "The obligatory star power guest shot occurs with 'Call On Me' featuring Nelly. Janet goes for her delicate wisp, but it sounds as if she's trying hard to maintain the crispness, straining to keep from cracking. Nelly delivers a slippery grind, making this also the obligatory 'time to get your sex on' number." [17]  Don Baiocchi of  Blogcritics  was mixed, writing that "to kick off a comeback with the mediocre 'Call On Me,' a duet where she actually makes Nelly sing, is just plain wrong. 'Call on Me' wasn't the way to do that." [18]  He also noted that "details like the tiny hand claps in 'Call On Me' are bizarre missteps." [19]  Evan Serpick of  Rolling Stone  wrote that "it shamelessly re-creates ' Dilemma ,' the St. Louis rapper's collaboration with  Kelly Rowland ." [20]  Johnny Loftus of  Metro Times  was also negative, writing that the song "falls flat." [21]

The song premiered on New York City's  Z100  on June 17, 2006. In the United States, the song was played one hundred and eighty-four times two days prior to its official release, on four different formats of radio, generating an audience impression of 4.358 million. By its official radio release date, it had achieved 8.679 million audience impressions. "Call on Me" debuted at number eight on the  Billboard   Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles  chart, a position roughly equivalent to number one hundred and eight on the  Hot 100 . The song also debuted at number forty-eight on the  Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs  chart two days after its official release, which was the highest debut of the week. The following week, the song debuted on the  Billboard   Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay  chart at number nineteen, the highest debut since  TLC 's " No Scrubs ", which debuted at number thirteen in February 1999. [22]  "Call on Me" was released on the  iTunes Store  on July 18, 2006, which helped the song rise from number sixty-three to number twenty-five, the song's Hot 100 peak position. The following week, the song lost digital download points and fell to number thirty-three in its sixth week on the Hot 100. A limited retail shipment of the single was released on September 5, 2006 in the U.S. The song quickly reached number one on the  Hot 100 Singles Sales  chart, where it remained for six non-consecutive weeks, making it her longest stay atop the sales chart, beating out 1993's " That's the Way Love Goes ", which spent five. [23]  "Call on Me" spent six weeks atop the  Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles Sales  chart.

The song also topped the  Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs  chart for two non-consecutive weeks, becoming Jackson's fifteenth number-one R&B hit, her first since 2001's " All for You ". [24]  It was Nelly's fourth number one on the R&B chart, his first since 2002's " Dilemma ". [24]  "Call on Me" became Janet's thirtieth top 10 single on  Billboard ' s  Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs  chart, which tied her with  R. Kelly  for scoring the most top 10 singles ever in the chart's history. [25]  In late September, "Call on Me" became the first of Jackson's number-one R&B hits to return to the pole position after dropping from number one. [24]  Overall, "Call on Me" was a success, finishing as the eighth best-selling single of the year and second in the urban format. It was the twenty-seventh most played song at urban radio and finished overall at number twenty-two on  Billboard ' s 2006 Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs year-end chart.

In the United Kingdom, "Call on Me" debuted at number eighteen the week of September 23, 2006; it was the highest-charting new entry of that week. [26]  It spent five weeks on the chart, dropping at number 70, on October 28, 2006. [26]  The track also became a top twenty hit in several European countries. In  Finland , the song peaked at number 20. [27]  In  Ireland , the song also debuted and peaked at number 20, on the  IRMA  chart week ending September 21, 2006. [28]  The song was even more successful in  New Zealand , where it debuted at number 40, but ultimately peaked at number 11, spending 11 weeks on the chart. [29]  In  Italy , the song peaked higher, debuting at number seven on the  FIMI  charts. [30]

The  music video  for "Call on Me" was directed by  Hype Williams  and took ten days to be completed. [31]  The video's theme was inspired by  Aesop’s Fables  and is composed of live action and animation. It was filmed inside an aircraft hangar at the  JFK Airport  in New York City, New York. The music video incorporates Indian, Asian, and African styles, with a mixture of outfits and hairstyles. Outfits worn in the video included a specially-designed  Kimono , metal corset, and nine-inch platform heels, with a total of five wardrobe changes. "Call on Me" is one of the  most expensive music videos of all time , with a production cost of over $1,000,000. [32]

Speaking about the video to  Us Weekly , director Hype Williams said "We wanted it to feel like we were painting a beautiful picture." Jermaine Dupri announced that the music video would be "the most expensive video of the last three years." "We pushed it as far as we could go. "We tried to get a goddess feel", said make-up artist Fran Cooper. Behind the scenes footage and the making of "Call on Me" was documented on an episode of  Access Granted  before its official premiere. [33]  The video premiered on July 26, 2006, also premiering in Canada on  MuchMusic  and  CTV  on July 27, 2006. The music video for "Call on Me" hit number one on  106 & Park  on August 16, 2006 and reached number eighteen on the channel's year-end countdown. The music video is featured on the deluxe edition and iTunes exclusive edition of  20 Y.O.

Following the release of the music video,  TMZ  reported: "Fans of Janet Jackson are in a fury over the alleged lack of support MTV is showing their first  Icon . MTV has yet to premiere or even announce a date of a debut for the singer's latest video "Call On Me". Fans have flooded the MTV.com message boards with tons of Janet support, but, according to these fans, many posts were deleted by a moderator. There is much speculation over why Janet has been "blacklisted" from MTV airplay, but most fingers point to her 2004 Super Bowl "wardrobe malfunction," which was co-produced by MTV, who was fined by the  U.S. Federal Communications Commission  for the mishap. Calls to MTV were not immediately returned." [34]

Janet performed the song with  Nelly  on the  Today  show. [35]  She later performed the song on the  Rock Witchu Tour , with Nelly on the screens. Bob Grendon writing for  Chicago Tribune  said the duet lacked soul. [36]  It was added to the setlist of the  Number Ones, Up Close and Personal  tour.

Digital download

U.S. promo CD single [39]

U.S. CD single   (094636912325) [40]

French Remixes   (094638 033851) [41]

Other

UK CD 1   (VUSCD) [44]

UK CD 2   (VUSDX330) [45]

UK 12" single   (VUST 330) [46]

U.S. 12" single   (7282311) [47]

House  remixes by  Tony Moran ,  Junior Caldera , and  Disclosure  were released in addition to  urban  remixes by Bionix, Waku,  Lil Jon ,  Luny Tunes , and Full Phat.

* sales figures based on certification alone 
 ^ shipments figures based on certification alone

|}