Car and Track  was America's first nationally syndicated  auto racing  and car test television show. Produced by Car and Track Productions, it was hosted and produced by  Bud Lindemann , a famous race commentator of the time. After the TV series ended, Bud and his son David Lindemmann continued to film many types of racing. In the early days of NASCAR, they compiled one of the most important film libraries of the early days of NASCAR. Car and Track was based in Grand Rapids, Michigan. This allowed them to have close relationships with Detroit automotive manufacturers and suppliers.

It is believed to have run from 1967 to 1975, with 80 or more episodes originally airing on  CBS . In later years, the cable television station Speedvision (which in 2002 became the  Speed Channel ), aired re-runs from approximately 1996 to 2002. In 2005, network executives revamped the old program, turning it into a primetime  NASCAR  history highlight show retitled  Back in the Day , and hosted by NASCAR driver  Dale Earnhardt, Jr.   [1]  It now had a modern, more mass appeal look, though only highlighting select NASCAR racing footage the show carried. The ending of the show does pay homage to the original ending, showing the original host Bud Lindemann's goodbye quote. The quotes varied among episodes but usually stated, "..and drive safely, won't you? All the pros do."

Aside from the show's large attention to NASCAR racing, it also included various other American racing including  NHRA   drag racing ,  USAC  stock car and  Champ Car  racing ( Champ Car  at that time implied  USAC ) and  Sprint car racing  on paved and dirt ovals. Also featured were  IHRA   Funny Car  and  Top Fuel  drag racing events. One or more new-car road tests per episode were also featured. The racing library was not limited to automobiles, they even filmed snowmobile racing.

The series used stock music cues, most of them also used by  NFL Films , for its varied features, such as in coverage of the 1974  Daytona 500 , which used the  Jack Trombey  track "Military Attache," a cue that opened NFL Films'  1974 Pittsburgh Steelers season review film . The show's 1968 opening theme (using footage from  Rockingham  and  Daytona  shot in 1965 and footage of one of  Andy Granatelli 's turbine Indycars at  Milwaukee  in 1968) was a variation of Trombey's track "Rhythmical Interruption No. 2." A track used frequently was the  Peter Reno  track "Recoil." In the later years, the original music came from numerous southern source with everything from country to styles that are reminiscent of Jimmy Buffet.

Footage was also shot from the 1974  Yankee 400  that was used in the show's main title sequence indicating sponsorship of the series by Blue Max automotive products.

From time-to-time, other features, such as safety reports and driver safety education segments, would be included. In one 1971 episode actor  James Garner  was accompanied for high-speed safety training at the Skip Barber Racing School behind the wheel of an  Oldsmobile Cutlass . Footage of other events, such as stunt and arena shows or conceptual auto displays, was often used to close the show.

New car testing in the show did not focus exclusively on one particular type of vehicle. Although " muscle cars " seemed to make up the bulk of the reviews, and Bud Lindemann seemed to express extra enthusiasm for them, economy cars,  Jeeps , and even motorhomes were also occasionally tested. Vehicles were shown in then original forms. As in today's car testing methods, the vehicles were usually the highest level furnished of the model, or in some instances prototypes. Many of the tests were filmed on the Waterford Hills Road Race Course in Clarkston, Michigan (just north of Detroit). Most tests filmed at Grattan raceway near Grand Rapids.

Prototypes included:

Production vehicles tested included: