Cassino  is a  folk  band from  Huntsville ,  Alabama , created from the remnants of the band  Northstar .

In April 2005, Cassino was birthed from the remnants of the two principal songwriters of the Alabama rock group  Northstar  – an inevitably organic genesis [ citation needed ]  that came to light through a creative bond that existed for numerous years between childhood friends  Nick Torres  and  Tyler Odom . They began recording their first album in 2006 with Nashville-based producer–drummer  Craig Krampf , known for his work with artists including  Dolly Parton ,  Alabama ,  Townes Van Zandt ,  Steve Perry  and  Melissa Etheridge . While the record doesn't have a specifically Nashville sound, the city did become prevalent in the making of their debut record  Sounds of Salvation , both as a new environment to inspire songwriting, and in the cast of characters brought in by Krampf. “Salvation” was soon blessed by the contributions of  E Street Band  bassist  Garry Tallent  and saxophonist  Jim Horn . Released independently on March 29, 2007,  Sounds of Salvation  is the fruit of this blending of various states and sounds.

After touring the U.S. in support of the album, Cassino settled down and started working on another full-length record in the beginning of 2008. Odom exited the process (he now plays with the group Destry), and Torres teamed up to write primarily with Alabama native and long-time friend Edward Puckett. Puckett filled in on bass for the earlier Cassino tours, and through constant exposure, they found that their similar tastes and different styles complemented each other well. They set up shop in a small apartment, and wrote and recorded for most of 2008. The city of Nashville this time found its way into the recording process through the contributions of friends and session/touring musicians Kevin Arrowsmith (fiddle, banjo, mandolin), Tripper Ryder (bass) and  Craig Krampf  (drums, percussion). This newest endeavor became  Kingprince .

It was released digitally in December 2009, and was released physically in January 2010

Nick Torres and Ed Puckett have gone back into the studio to record a new album recorded and released in the form of two, six song EPs. The first half of the album will be titled  Bottlenecker  and was scheduled to be released in the Spring of 2016. Upon the digital release they will get right back into the studio and start tracking the second half of the record.

Their shows are few and far between, usually touring with  As Tall As Lions . They started a US tour, in November 2007, with the band Straylight Run. Also appearing in this tour were Dear And The Headlights, The Color Fred and Clouds Take Shape.