Cheryl Ann Jacques  (born February 17, 1962) is an American  politician  and attorney who served six terms in the  Massachusetts Senate , was the president of the  Human Rights Campaign  for 11 months, and served as an administrative judge in the Massachusetts Department of Industrial Accidents.

Jacques graduated from  Boston College  in 1984 and received her  J.D.  from  Suffolk University Law School  in 1987. [1]

Jacques was Assistant District Attorney in Middlesex County and Assistant Attorney General of the state. She ran for U.S. Congress, but lost in the Democratic primary to  Stephen Lynch . Jacques was the first openly lesbian member of the  Massachusetts Senate  where she served six terms, and  came out  as a lesbian during her fourth, citing the statistic that one-third of  gay and lesbian teens attempt suicide  as part of her motivation for coming out. [2]  She was succeeded in the state Senate by  Scott Brown . [3]

Jacques became president of HRC in 2004, succeeding  Elizabeth Birch . She addressed the  2004 Democratic National Convention  in this post. [4]  She resigned on November 30, 2004, citing "a difference in management philosophy" with her board, following criticism of the HRC's failure to defeat voter  referendums  in 11 states banning  same-sex marriage  and, in some cases,  civil unions . [5]

After leaving HRC, she was  of counsel  to the law firm of Brody, Hardoon, Perkins and Kesten and was a consultant on diversity issues to corporations and non-profit organizations. [6]

In 2008 Jacques was named a Department of Industrial Accidents Administrative Judge by Governor  Deval Patrick . On March 12, 2012 the State Ethics Commission charged her with violating Massachusetts' conflict-of-interest law after she allegedly tried to use her clout as a judge to have a dentist office reduce her brother-in-law’s bill. [7] [8]  Jacques contended that she never intended to introduce her position, but did so "inadvertently". The ethics commission found in favor of Jacques on the grounds that the enforcement division failed to prove that Jacques used her official position to intervene in the dispute. [9]  In 2013, Jacques and two other administrative judges filed charges with the  Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination , alleging the agency provided a higher salary and a parking space to a male judge appointed after them. In 2014, Governor Patrick chose not to reappoint Jacques, which she alleged was in retaliation for the gender discrimination lawsuit. [10]

In 2004, Jacques married  Jennifer Chrisler . [11]  They have three sons. [12]

Category:LGBT culture