Chesterfield  is a brand of  cigarette  made by  Altria . It was named for  Chesterfield County, Virginia . It was one of the most recognized brands of the early and mid 20th century, but sales have declined steadily over the years. Chesterfields were originally produced by the  Liggett & Myers Tobacco Company . In 1999, Liggett sold the L&M, Lark and Chesterfield brands to Philip Morris Companies Inc. The brand is still being made today; it is still popular in Europe, but has been absent from U.S. advertising for many years.

In the 1930s through the 1950s, Chesterfield sponsored popular radio programs. An early one was the radio series  Music That Satisfies  which was broadcast in 1932-1933. The  Chesterfield Hour  (1939–1944) featured  big bands  such as those of  Paul Whiteman  and  Glenn Miller [1]  and  Fred Waring . [2]  It was followed briefly by  Johnny Mercer 's  Chesterfield Music Shop  (1944) and then the  Chesterfield Supper Club  (1944-1949) which featured  Perry Como  and  Jo Stafford  with  Peggy Lee  replacing Stafford on some episodes beginning in 1948. [2]   Johnny Mercer  originally wrote the  pop standard  song " Dream (When You're Feeling Blue) " as the theme song for his Chesterfield radio program; [3]  the theme for Como's  Chesterfield Supper Club  was the basis for "Smoke Dreams", covered by Jo Stafford,  k.d. lang , and other artists.

Liggett & Myers sponsored  Dragnet , both on radio and on TV, during the 1950s. The 1954 theatrical version of  Dragnet  also had Chesterfield product placements, such as advertisements in scenes taking place at drug stores and news counters, or cigarette vending machines. Jack Webb as Sgt. Joe Friday was seen smoking Chesterfields in the movie and TV series. Also in the 1950s,  Gunsmoke  on both radio and TV was similarly sponsored primarily by Chesterfields and L&Ms. At the end of  The Twilight Zone , for several seasons  Rod Serling  frequently smoked and promoted Chesterfields.

In the 1940s and 1950s  Ronald Reagan ,  Bob Hope ,  Bing Crosby ,  Perry Como , and  Arthur Godfrey  were among Chesterfield's official spokesmen; Chesterfield being one of the primary sponsors of the radio and TV programs of these stars during that time.

Ian Fleming  frequently makes references to different smoking products in his famous  James Bond  novels. The Chesterfield brand of cigarette are portrayed as one of Bond's favorites as seen in the 1959 book  Goldfinger .  In this novel, James Bond demands of Goldfinger's servant, "Oddjob, I want a lot of food, quickly. And a bottle of bourbon, soda and ice. Also a carton of Chesterfields, king-size..." [4]

Longtime college football coach  Paul "Bear" Bryant  smoked unfiltered Chesterfields, often two to three packs per day. The habit was the main contributing factor to his fatal  heart attack  in 1983 at age 69.

In  Quentin Tarantino 's 1992 movie  Reservoir Dogs ,  Mr. White offers Mr. Pink a Chesterfield cigarette in an attempt to calm him. In another Tarantino-penned movie, 1993's  True Romance ,  Clarence Worley's father, Clifford, smokes a Chesterfield before his execution at the hands of Blue Lou Boyle's  consigliere,  Vincenzo Coccotti.

In  Donald Fagen 's 1982 title track of  The Nightfly : "I've got plenty of java and Chesterfield Kings".

In  Jack Clayton 's  1974 adaptation  of  The Great Gatsby , Gatsby ( Robert Redford ) splits the last Chesterfield in his pack with Nick Carraway ( Sam Waterston ) while the two chat on Carraway's porch. Nick Carraway is a thinly-disguised F. Scott Fitzgerald in  The Great Gatsby . Fitzgerald's favorite cigarette was Chesterfield's, so the scene is an accurate adaptation. [5]

In the popular  HBO  TV series  Boardwalk Empire , Agent Knox is seen giving three packs of Chesterfield cigarettes to Clayton.

In  Jim Jarmusch 's 1984 film  Stranger Than Paradise  the main characters smoke Chesterfields, at times discussing where they can purchase them.

In the  Coen brothers ' 2001  The Man Who Wasn't There , a black and white neo-noir film set in 1949, the main character is an unfiltered Chesterfield chain smoker.

Humphrey Bogart  frequently appeared in Chesterfield advertisements. A scene from the movie  To Have and Have Not  shows him with a pack of Chesterfields.

In the 2005 film  Memoirs of a Geisha , after Pumpkin has immersed herself in World War II American soldier culture, she tells Sayuri that she only smokes Chesterfields now.

The 1992  Jawbreaker  song "Chesterfield King" is named for the king-sized chesterfield. The song refers to the cigarette twice. First, the singer shares a chesterfield with a woman he meets in a parking lot. Later, at the end of the song, the singer gives a Chesterfield King to the woman he has been singing about.

In the song "Telling Stories" from the 1995 album  Wrapped in Sky  by  Drivin N Cryin  appears the lyrics, "Hooking up with John and Mark, At the playground, Chesterfields and bubble gum".

Jake Blues ( John Belushi ) smoked Chesterfield cigarettes in the 1980 film  The Blues Brothers . Near the end of the scene at Bob's Country Bunker, Jake is seen briefly flashing a flattened and nearly empty pack of Chesterfield cigarettes, pretending it is his musician's union ID card.

The Chesterfield Kings  are a rock band named after the cigarette.

In the 1994 film  The Shawshank Redemption , Red ( Morgan Freeman ) is seen giving a pack of Chesterfield cigarettes to Heywood ( William Sadler ) after losing the "Fresh Fish" bet. Heywood sniffs the cigarettes and says "Yes, Richmond, Virginia."

In numerous Stephen King novels, his characters frequently smoke Chesterfield cigarettes.

In 2016, a Chesterfield cigarette dated from 1951 was smoked. This was the oldest known cigarette to ever been smoked.  [6]