Children 1st , previously known as the  Royal Scottish Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Children  (RSSPCC), is a Scottish charity which aims to give every child in  Scotland  a safe and secure childhood. Children 1st supports families under stress, protects children from harm and neglect, promotes children’s rights and helps children recover from abuse. [1]

The RSSPCC has its origins in the anti cruelty movement that grew in America in the 19th century. Following a landmark lawsuit, in which the  American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals  took a case under animal cruelty legislation against two New Yorkers for abusing an eight-year-old child, Societies for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children sprang up on both sides of the Atlantic. [2]

In 1884 it was beginning to be understood that there was a considerable amount of abuse to children being perpetrated on children in the UK. To counter this the first Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children was established in London. Following on from this creation in England branches began to be set up throughout  Scotland  and in 1889, the  Glasgow  and  Edinburgh  branches joined to form the  Scottish National Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Children . [3]

In the same year, the first  Act of Parliament  for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children was passed.

The  NSPCC , also began to come into existence around this time and now operates in England,  Wales  and  Northern Ireland . Although the two charities are completely separate organisations, they work together to improve the lives of children and families throughout the UK.

In 1921 the Scottish National Society received Royal Charter and became the Royal Scottish Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Children (RSSPCC).

In its early incarnation the society was set up to rescue children living rough and begging on the streets, in later years the Society became better known for investigating child abuse and neglect.

In 1968 new legislation gave responsibility for investigating child abuse to local authority social work departments. As a result, the role of RSSPCC changed. However, it was some years before the charity changed its name to reflect this change in role, adopting the campaigning name Children 1st in 1995. [3]

Today, Children 1st provides 46 services in 17 local authority areas as well as four national services including ParentLine Scotland which is the free, national telephone helpline for anyone with a concern about a child. Between April 2007 and March 2011 CHILDREN 1ST operated  ChildLine  Scotland on behalf of the  NSPCC . [4]

Children 1st has pioneered the use of the  Family Group Conference  in Scotland, [5]  and also provides a befriending service “Bfriends”, [6]  several local family support services, a number of abuse and trauma recovery services across Scotland, and the national Safeguarding in Sport service. [7]

Children 1st also campaigns and lobbies on behalf of children and young people in Scotland. The campaigning priorities of Children 1st build on the work of its services. The organisation is part of campaigning coalitions, including Children Are Unbeatable!, which campaigns for an end to physical punishment, and Justice for Children, which campaigns for better conditions for children giving evidence in court.

Kilts for Kids is a year-round fundraising event celebrating all things Scottish. Hamish the Highland Coo was launched as the mascot for this fundraising drive on August 30, 2012. [8]  Since 2008, thousands of people have taken part in Kilts for Kids organising their own Scottish-themed fundraising event.

The first Kilts for Kids event was launched in  Glasgow  on 19 September 2008 with the support of media personality Kaye Adams, and comedians  Karen Dunbar  and Sanjeev Singh Kohli.

.