Chyavana  ( Sanskrit :  च्यवन , Cyavana) was a  rishi  in  Hindu mythology . He was son of  Bhrigu  and is known for his rejuvenation through a special herbal paste known as  Chyawanprash , which was first prepared. According to the  Mahabharata , he was powerful enough to oppose the  Vajra  of  Indra  and was responsible for the  Ashvins  getting their share of the sacrificial offerings. He created a demon,  Mada , to achieve it. [1]

Chyavana is mentioned in the  Rigveda  as Chyavāna (च्यवान). He is described as an aged and feeble person whose youth and strength was restored by the twin Ashvini Kumar brothers, who were the  Rajya Vaids  or 'State Doctors'. According to a hymn of this text (X.61.1-3), Chyavāna seems to be opposed to Turvayana, an Indra worshipper  Paktha  king as he was closer to the Ashvins. [2]

According to one tradition, he married  Vaivasvata Manu 's daughter Arushi and their son was Aurva. According to another tradition, he married  Sukanya , daughter of Vedic king 'Sharyati' and granddaughter of Vaivasvata Manu. They had two sons Apnavana and Dadhicha. [3]  He is also considered as father of Harita. [1]

According to an account found in the  Mahabharata  ( Adi Parva , Ch.5-6), when  Bhrigu 's wife Puloma was pregnant and lived in her hermitage, a  Rakshasa  harassed her. Puloma's child slipped from her womb, called a 'chyut' child in Sanskrit, (early delivery) and thus received his name Chyavana. The Rakshasa, seeing the child drop released his mother [4]  but immediately converted into ashes.

Chyavana studied the Vedas from his father Bhrigu and later acquired the knowledge of Vedas from Brahma. He subsequently became a Brahmarshi.

The earliest version of the narrative of Chyavana's practice of austerities and subsequent restoration of youth is found in the  Brahmanas . A later version of this narrative is found in the Mahabharata. More later versions are found in the  Bhagavata Purana  and the  Padma Purana . [5]

In a narrative found in the  Satapatha Brahmana  (IV.1.5.1-13), Chyavana is mentioned as a descendant of Bhrigu. While, all the Bhrigus, the descendants of the Angirasas, were away, Chyavana with senile body was living in his Ashram. Once, King Sharyati, son of Manu came for hunting near Chyavana's Ashram (hermitage) with his army. Sharyati's daughter Sukanya along with friends was also with him. She went to Chyavana Rishi's Ashram, where the Rishi was in meditation. White white-ants had covered his body and only his eyes were visible. Not knowing it was a human, Sukanya pierced the Rishi's eyes. Chyavana was in pain and became furious and his curse created discord amongst Sharyati's army. When Sharyati found the cause of his misfortune, he offered his daughter Sukanya for marriage to Chayavana, so that she could take care of revered saint.

Later, the Ashvins came to his Ashram and tried to seduce Sukanya. Sukanya who refused to leave her husband, instead asked the Ashvins to restore Chyavana's youth. Following their advice, Chyavana's youth was restored by a combination of three treatments. Certain herbs were put into a pond and the Rishi was asked to have a dip in the pond. [6]  A herbal paste was prepared for application on the body of Rishi, which was part of 'Kayakalp'. And a special herbal paste,  Chyawanprash  was prepared for Rishi to take as medicine.

In return, the Ashvins obtained a share in the sacrificial offerings in  Kurukshetra  on her suggestion. In the  Aitareya Brahmana  (VIII.21.4), the inauguration of Sharyata by him is compared with the  Indra 's coronation. [2]

According to the narrative found in the  Vana Parva  (Ch.122-5) of the Mahabharata, Chyavana was so absorbed in practising austerities on the side of a lake that white ants built up their nests all over his body and only his eyes were left. Once, Sharyati along with his army and the  harem  came to visit the place.  Sukanya , daughter of king Sharyati, seeing only two bright eyes in what seemed to be an anthill, poked them with a stick. Chyavana felt excessive pain and became furious. He obstructed the calls of nature of Sharyati's army. He was pleased only after the king gave him his daughter in marriage. [7]  Subsequently, the Ashvins came to the hermitage of Chyavana. They saw Sukanya while she was bathing and tried to convince Sukanya to reject old and ugly Chyavana and accept one of them as her husband. They also promised to restore the youth of Chyavana first so that she could make an unbiased choice amongst Chyavana and one of them. Sukanya rejected their proposal and informed Chyavana. Later, at the behest of Chyavana, Sukanya requested the Ashvins to do so. All three took bath in the lake and came out with the same youthful divine look. Each of them requested Sukanya to be his bride, but she identified Chyavana and selected him only. In gratitude, Chyavana assured the Ashvins that he will ensure that the Ashvins get shares of the sacrificial offerings. [8]  Accordingly, Chyavana, while officiating as a priest of Sharyati in a  soma sacrifice , offered the share of the sacrifice to the Ashvins.  Indra  objected to it as the Ashvins wandered amongst men as physicians. He tried to hurl his  vajra  towards Chyavana, but his arms were stayed by Chyavana, before he could do so. Chyavana by virtue of his ascetic energy, created a huge demon, Mada, with four fangs. [9]  Mada was on the point of devouring Indra, when he became afraid and finally accepted the right of the Ashvins to have share of the offerings. [10]

In a narrative found in the  Anushasana Parva  (Ch.52-56) of the Mahabharata, Chayvana exacted many menial offices from king Kushika and his queen for 21 days. Later, he was pleased by their devotion and rewarded them by creating a magical palace of gold and predicting the birth of their grandson endued with great energy,  Vishvamitra , who would attain to the status of a  Brahmana . [1] [11]

According to the  Padma Purana  (Patala Khanda, Ch.8), his hermitage was on the  Satpura Range , near the river  Payoshni . According to another tradition, his hermitage was in  Dhosi Hill  in the Vedic State of  Brahmavarta , near  Narnaul  in  Mahendragarh district . [12]  Another place claimed to be the location of Chyavana's hermitage (ashram) is Chaunsa in Buxar district of  Bihar . [13]