Cleverdicks  is a game show that originally aired on  Sky Atlantic , hosted by  Ann Widdecombe , now shown on  Challenge . Four contestants compete each episode for the right to call themselves "cleverdicks" and play for a cash jackpot. As explained by host Widdecombe at the top of the first episode, a cleverdick is a person who is "irritatingly and ostentatiously knowledgeable or intelligent." The question material is therefore primarily academic in nature.

The show deliberately featured Britain's top quiz contestants (people who had won other shows). The very first show had  David Stainer , one of the top quizzers in the world and champion of champions on  Only Connect . He had a big score in the first round but lost to Rob Hannah (from  Eggheads ,  Who Wants to Be a Millionaire  and other shows).

In later shows Rob Hannah reached the final several times and beat several other top quiz players including Alan Gibbs (who also was in a team that won  Only Connect ), Nic Mortimer (the youngest contestant of the series) and Brian Pendreigh (who was in the news after  Eggheads  a few weeks before - which his team won).

The game is played in rounds; at the end of each round, the lowest-scoring player is eliminated. The last remaining contestant in the game plays for the money.

Each contestant has two minutes to answer a series of questions, each with five clues of decreasing difficulty. They may offer an answer after each clue, with a correct answer on the first clue being worth 5 points, and decreasing by one point with each additional clue. The contestant may also move on to the next question after any clue. The player with the fewest points in this round is eliminated.

The contestants' scores are reset to zero prior to the start of this round. As in the first round, a question is asked, and up to five clues are given. In this round, the contestants must buzz in for the right to answer. Each contestant may buzz in on each clue; the correct answer earns the points at that clue level. In addition, the contestant is given the first chance at three related bonus questions for one point each; any questions that the contestant misses is offered on the buzzers to their opponents. After eight questions, the player with the lowest score is eliminated.

Before the start of the round, the player with the higher score from round 2 is given the choice of going first or second. The contestants are asked questions in turn. With every incorrect answer, or failure to answer, a triangle is added to that contestant's side of the game board. If a contestant has at least one triangle on their side of the game board, a correct answer removes a triangle from their side. As the round progresses, a white line slowly moves down the game board; when it touches either contestant's stack of triangles, that contestant loses. The winner earns the title of "Cleverdick," the right to return on the next show, and moves on to the final round to play for the cash jackpot.

Triangles bearing questions on various subjects drop down onto the game board in a stack for the winning contestant to answer. As the round progresses, additional questions are added to the contestant's stack every few seconds; the contestant is only allowed to answer the question at the bottom of the stack. A correct answer removes the bottom category from the stack and the rest of the categories fall down.

During the round, the contestant is allowed to "drop" two questions from the bottom of the stack, which can only hold a maximum of eight questions without passing the white line at the top of the board; if a ninth question is added, the game is over. If the contestant can stay in the round for a total of two minutes, he or she wins a cash jackpot that starts at £1,000 and increases by £1,000 each show until it is won.