Dajal  is a small town in Tehsil  Jampur  Distt. Rajan Pur  of  Punjab ,  Pakistan . It is on the border of  Balochistan  province. It is located at 29°33′34″N 70°22′33"E, and its population is around 50,000. A few people are working in  Saudi Arabia  and  United Arab Emirates

Dajal town was established by a saint named Dawood, when he was passing through a mud dunes, he stayed there under the tree, in local Siraiki language it is called "JAAL". After that place become a small village and called as Doowd Jaal, Afterward when population was increasing, town name changed to Dawojal and finally Dajal. [ citation needed ]

During the rule of Langahs in 1452, Islam Khan a relation of Lodhi King of Delhi was in charge of the southern part of the Multan Province. Nahars overthrew the supremacy of Langah and the then Lodhi King of Delhi approved the act. Nahars annexed a greater part of Dera Ghazi Khan and charged upon the territory of Dajal and Harrand in the north. Their march was repelled by Miranis in 1482. Albeit the country around Harrand and Dajal inhabited by Gorchani and Lunds tribes was governed by  Khan of Kalat  Mir Noori Naseer Khan Baloch for 70 years after defeating  Ahmed Shah Abdali  in 1758.  Khan of Kalat  retained this tract of land until 1827. Besides the area around Dajal and Harrand the Baloch tribes of Koh-e-Suleman including Marris, Bugtis and Kethrans are said to have been under nominal subjugation of Khan of Kalat though Qaisranis and Buzdars served as personal body guards of  Khan of Kalat  , but the Khan could never extend his direct sway over these tribes i.e. Qaisranis, Buzdars, Lunds, Khosas, Legharis, Gorchanis and Mazaris inhabiting the mountainous tract from north of south The country of Harrand and Dajal came under the control of  Khan of Kalat  Mir Naseer Khan Baloch after defeating  Ahmed Shah Abdali  in Kalat Balochistan in 1758. This tract remained under the Khanate up till 1827. In 1827, the Nawab of Bhawalpur occupied the country of Dajal and Harrand for Sikh and thus the rule of  Khan of Kalat  came to an end over this area. Kabul, the British Government in 1838, at Lahore, ratified the treaty of 1834 between the Shah and the Maharajah.

By this treaty Shah Shuja renounced his claim to all jurisdiction over the province of Harrand Dajal, at that time still nomi- nally in the Kalat Khanate. Soon after Ranjit Singh's death in 1839. no one having been- found fit to fill the place of that astute ruler, the whole of this part of the country fell into a state of anarchy. The Kalat Sardars, instigated, it is said, by the Khan, raided Harrand Dajal in retaliation for the conduct of the Sikh Government, and in their endeavour to recover the stolen province, all became anarchy and confusion throughout the Dera Ghazi Khan district. The conquest of Sindh in 1843 and annexation of the Punjab in 1849 advanced our North- West Frontier across the Indus to the hills bordering Afghanistan and Kalat. In this connection one feature is distinctly noticeable. Prior to, the Tripartite Treaty of 1838 the district of Harrand Dajal — including the Gurchanis, Mazaris, and certain Harris — was claimed by the  Khan of Kalat .

Saraiki  is the main language of the town. In nearby areas,  Balochi  is also spoken. There is a trend in people for speaking  Urdu .

Previously Dajal was regarded as a Town Committee but after dissolution of power to the district government plan of  President   Pervez Musharraf . It was divided into different union councils and the town committee status was abolished.

The Dajal Canal is the main source of irrigation for the people of the area and for population of whole Rajanpur District. It is drained from the Taunsa Barrage of Indus river. It is an artificial watercourse in the country of Pakistan. Its center lies at a latitude of 29.5418000 and longitude of 70.3600000 and it has an elevation of 124 meters above sea level.

Major Rod Kohi areas traversed by hill torrents constitute nearly 65 percent of the total area of Pakistan and encompass entire Balochistan. Rod-Kohi or hill torrent cultivation is a unique system of agriculture being practiced in all the four provinces.people Living in Pachadh area store rod kohi water for the cultivation of crop. Every year in summer season rod kohi water effected the vast area of Dajal and pachad. Mostly people and animals lost their life. Govt. of Pakistan made small dam but due to the huge water all small dam were destroyed.

The land of Dajal is very fertile in regard to agriculture. Cotton, wheat are generally produced in Dajal. Different vegetables are also grown there. Mangoes and dates are common fruits grown in this region.

Dajal is one of the most famous city in Sub division Jampur, Dera Ghazi Khan division.

Raja Harnacus” and his son Lok Bhagat had constructed the Fort of Harrand on the style of Monojodero. That is the reason structure of Harrand Fort seems contemporaneous civilization of Monojodero. Muslim rulers from Muhammad Bin Qasim to Ahmed Shah Abdali had maintained their sovereignty at this area. When the Region of Harrand was being ruled by Nadir. This fort was a route passage for Afghan-Iranian Invaders to  Multan  and  India . It is said that  Alexander the Great  passed through this area on his quest to conquer the world. Antiques found in this area point to Alexander’s visit. According to local legend Alexander was inspired by the beauty of a local queen named Rukhsana and married her in Harand Fort. Locals say that the  Unilever  soap  Rexona  was named after her.

The Dajal are a draft type of cattle and are found mainly in the Dajal area in district Rajan Pur in Punjab Province. Their color is white or gray, deepening to almost black on the neck, shoulder and hump in mature males. The average weight at maturity of Dajal cattle is 500 kg for males and 390 kg for females. The Dajal breed is an offshoot of Bhagnari breed, having almost similar points. However, Dajal cattle are comparatively smaller in size and lighter in color.

Dajal Cattle Breeding Farm was established in 1985 on the state landing Rakh DhundhiFazilpur. The farm land was transferred to WPADC in February 1964 to operate it as seed farm. After a lapse of 8 years i.e. 1972, the WPADC was dissolved and the Punjab government again decided to establish a cattle breeding farm at Fazilpur to cope with the demands of Dera Ghazi Khan Division. Initially a livestock experiment station was established in 1972–73 for the breeding of Dajal cattle and Awassi sheep, but soon after the Dajal breed of cattle was replaced with Sahiwal under the direction of the provincial cabinet. Accordingly the scheme was revised and implemented with effect from 1973-74 to breed pure Sahiwal for the objectives given in the next paragraphs. Buffalos found in Pakistan make up 47% of Pakistan's major dairy animal's population providing more than about 61% of the total milk produced in the country. Buffalo breeds found in Pakistan are Nili Ravi, Kundi and Aza Kheli. Nili Ravi is considered best buffalo breed in world and known as Black Gold of Pakistan. Cattle constitute about 53% of the national population of major dairy animals in Pakistan and contribute the share of almost 34.9% to the total milk production in country. The cattle breeds found in the country are Sahiwal, Cholistani, Red Sndhi, Achai, Bhagnari, Dajal, Dhanni, Gibrali, Kankraj, Lohani, Rojhan, and Thari. Out of these, Sahiwal, Cholistani, and Red Sindhi are main dairy breeds and well known internationally due to their distinct characteristics. Other than well-defined cattle breeds, there are a large number of nondescript cattle breeds and crossbred cattle. Sahiwal and Cholistani are the two main dairy breeds of cattle. Their average milk production per lactation is about 1200–1800 liters with 4.5% butter fat. The age at first calving is more than 3.5 years and calving interval ranges between 1.5 and 2 years. Dhanni, Dajal and Rojhan are draught type breeds with milk production potential of 800-1000 liters per lactation. Utility of these draught breeds has declined over the years due to increased mechanization in agriculture. The production recording and progeny testing program is being executed in Sahiwal breed only and is limited to institutional herds.

Dajal is also the place of four Sufi sultans and saints named Abharng Sultan, Sanghi Sultan and Ganwar Sultan. Bodla Bahar and Ameer Hamza Sultan is the most famous of all these. [ citation needed ]  The Abharang Sultan Gathering (Maela) is a local festival. This festival (maela)starts from 1st Safar ul Muzzaffar to eight Safar ul Muzzaffar. People from nearby places come to see this maela. Chiragh are also lighted on the Tomb of Ahmad Abhrang Sultan. [ citation needed ]

Marri is a hilly station in the  Suliman Range , situated only few kilometres from Dajal (near the Lalgarh union council). Marri (Urdu: مرى) is a hill station in Rajanpur District, south Punjab, Pakistan. Its altitude is approximately 4800 ft above from sea level. It is about 75 km (47 mi) away from Fazilpur, 116 km (72 mi)from Jampur, 100 km (62 mi) away from Rajanpur and 116 km (72 mi) from Mithankot. Beautiful site and newly built Road is also seeable. Visitors can reach Marri from Fazilpur, Hajipur, Lalgarh and Dajal Road. It is also called Tumman-Gorchani. Because Gorchani tribe are living there. Chief of Gorchani tribe is Sardar Shehk Haidar Gorchani. Marri is a Bloch word which means "Ghar" Home. People from Dajal and nearby area go to Marri in summer season.

5.2 km / 3.2 miles