Daniel Cammish  (born 10 April 1989 in  Leeds ) is a racing driver from Great Britain.

Cammish made his karting debut in 2003, driving in the Manchester & Buxton Kart Club Junior Rotax Championship, in which he finished 20th. He raced in the Kartmasters British Grand Prix Super Libre, Super 1 National Formula A Championship and Super 1 National Rotax Max Championship before graduating to car racing in 2009, where he won the  Formula Ford  Scholarship class and competed in the  ADAC Formel Masters . In 2012, he suffered a broken pelvis in a high-speed accident during a race in Spain.

His biggest claim to fame was winning the  2013   British Formula Ford Championship  in dominant fashion, winning every race that he entered (24 wins in 24 races) as well as starting all but two of the races from the pole and setting 19 fastest laps. He set multiple records in the process of winning. His dominance of the Formula Ford Championship ensured that he would win the title in Rockingham by September, with two more race weekends to spare. Cammish thus skipped the final rounds of the season to celebrate winning the title. The championship runner-up and Cammish's nearest rival,  Harrison Scott , won the third race at Silverstone, with the other remaining races going to international drivers  Camren Kaminsky ,  Jayde Kruger  and  Juan Angel Rosso .

This won both Cammish and Scott a test for the  BTCC  Airwaves Ford team, with Cammish eyeing a full-time drive for the 2014 season. [1]  However Cammish secured a drive with Team Parker Racing alongside Barrie Baxter in a  Porsche 911  competing in the  2014 British GT Championship . [2]

In 2015, he raced in  Porsche Supercup  and  Porsche Carrera Cup GB , winning the title in the latter. It was another dominant performance in which he finished inside the top two for every race that season, securing the title after winning 11 of the 16 rounds. He returns to the series in 2016.

†  As Cammish was a guest driver, he was ineligible for championship points.  *  Season in progress.

( key ) (Races in  bold  indicate pole position) (Races in  italics  indicate fastest lap)

( key ) (Races in  bold  indicate pole position) (Races in  italics  indicate fastest lap)

†  As Cammish was a guest driver, he was ineligible to score points.  *  Season still in progress.