David Blair  (born 1973 in  Malawi  to British parents [ citation needed ] ) is the Chief Foreign Correspondent for the  Daily Telegraph , having formerly worked for the  Financial Times  as Energy Correspondent, and the  Daily Telegraph  as a Foreign Correspondent and then Diplomatic Editor.

Blair graduated from  St Benet's Hall ,  Oxford , [1]  with a First Class degree in  PPE . He was President of the  Oxford University Conservative Association  in 1993. [1]  He later attended  Corpus Christi College , Cambridge University, taking a M.Phil in International Relations.

Although born in  Malawi , [2]  Blair is a British citizen. He is not related to the former  British prime minister ,  Tony Blair . [3]

Blair began working for the  Daily Telegraph  in  Zimbabwe  in 1999. He was forced to leave the country by President  Robert Mugabe 's regime in June 2001. Blair later published a book about his experiences  Degrees in Violence: Robert Mugabe and the Struggle for Power in Zimbabwe . He was named Young Journalist of the Year in 2001 by the Foreign Press Association for his coverage of Zimbabwe. [4]

Thereafter, he was based in  Pakistan  (2002 - 2003) and the Middle East (2003 - 2004). He was among the first journalists to enter  Jenin Refugee Camp  in the  West Bank  after the controversial  Israeli   assault in April 2002 . Blair's front page report on the  Palestinian  suffering caused by this attack, headlined "Blasted to Rubble by the Israelis", [5]  attracted considerable attention as the  Daily Telegraph  had always been perceived as favourable to Israel.

Blair reported extensively from  Iraq  before and after the American-led  2003 invasion of Iraq . At the height of the  looting in Baghdad  in April 2003, Blair entered  Saddam Hussein 's old  foreign ministry  and found documents purporting to show that  George Galloway , then a member of parliament, had received money from the deposed regime. [4]  Galloway vigorously denied this charge and sued the  Daily Telegraph  for libel on the totality of the  Telegraph  reports, which included those by other journalists and editorials. [6]  Galloway won the case in November 2004 and the newspaper paid him damages of £150,000 plus, after a failed appeal, [7]  legal costs of about £2 million. [8]  The  Daily Telegraph  did not attempt to claim justification (where the defendant seeks to prove the truth of the defamatory reports): "It has never been the  Telegraph's  case to suggest that the allegations contained in these documents are true". [9]  Instead, the paper sought to argue that it acted responsibly because the allegations it reported were of sufficient public interest to outweigh the damage caused to Galloway's reputation. [10]  However the trial judge did not accept this defence saying the suggestion that Galloway was guilty of "treason", "in Saddam's pay", and being "Saddam's little helper" caused him to conclude "the newspaper was not neutral but both embraced the allegations with relish and fervour and went on to embellish them". [8]

Blair became the  Daily Telegraph' s Africa Bureau Chief in June 2004. He reported on the  war in Darfur , the  elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo  and the war in northern  Uganda . He left this job some time in late 2006.

In 2009 Blair left his  Daily Telegraph  diplomatic editor post to join the  Financial Times  as Middle East and Africa news editor. In 2010 he was appointed the  Financial Times  energy correspondent. [2] [11]

In November 2011 Blair returned to the  Daily Telegraph  as chief foreign correspondent. [12]