Dewey, Cheatem & Howe  is the  gag name  of a  fictional   law  or  accounting  firm, [1]  used in several  parody  settings. The gag name pokes fun at the perceived propensity of some lawyers and accountants to take advantage of their clients: The name of the firm is a  pun  on the phrase "Do we cheat 'em? And how!" This gag name is also used more broadly as a  placeholder  for any hypothetical law firm. [2] [3] [4] [5] [6]

The second name varies somewhat with regards to spelling (Cheetem, Cheater, Cheethem, Cheatham, etc.), but also to the word upon which it is based (Screwum, Burnham, etc.).

Tom and Ray Magliozzi , of  NPR's   Car Talk  radio program, named their business corporation "Dewey, Cheetham & Howe". Their corporate offices were located on a third-floor office at the corner of Brattle and JFK Streets in  Harvard Square  in  Cambridge, Massachusetts . The Magliozzi brothers declared that they established DC&H in 1989. [7]

A popular poster for  The Three Stooges  features the Stooges as bumbling members of such a firm, although the actual episodes use the name "Dewey, Burnham, and Howe".  The 2012 film  uses this example, among similar ones such as  proctologists  "Proba, Keister, and Wince" and  divorce lawyers  "Ditcher, Quick, and Hyde."

The champion  Standardbred  race horse  Deweycheatumnhowe  takes his name from this pun. On August 3, 2008, that undefeated horse won  harness racing 's most prestigious event, the  Hambletonian Stakes , run at the  Meadowlands Racetrack  in  East Rutherford, New Jersey . [8]

Variants exist on the theme. The British magazine  Private Eye  uses "Sue, Grabbitt, and Runne" (" sue , grab it and run") when satirizing the legal profession, reflecting the magazine's experience defending from  defamation  lawsuits. In a set of legal forms published for lawyers and other legal professionals, [ vague ]  one fictitious law-firm name is "Skrewer, Widow & Children." The narrating presidential aide in  Christopher Buckley 's novel  The White House Mess  came from the law firm of "Dewey, Scruem, and Howe".

Robin Williams  used a variant of the pun when making a joke about the  Bernard Madoff  fiasco and the fact that his name is pronounced as "made off" by saying "What's next, a law firm called Dewey, Fuckyou and Howe?"

The novel  Gump and Co. ,  Winston Groom 's sequel to  Forrest Gump , names "Dewey, Screwum, & Howe" as legal representation for members, including  Forrest Gump , of a New York firm accused of  insider trading .

In an episode of  Gilmore Girls ,  Luke Danes  ( Scott Patterson ), while dealing with his wife's irritating divorce lawyer, jokes that his own lawyer is Don Dewey at "Dewey, Cheatem, and Howe."

In an episode of  Prison Break ,  Theodore "T-Bag" Bagwell  states that he won a large sum of money after sustaining an injury on an oil rig, thanks to his lawyers at "Dewey, Cheatem, and Howe".

In an episode of  Friends ,  Chandler Bing 's boss states that the company they both work for has signed a contract with a new law firm: "Dewey, Cheatem and Howe". It is, of course, in the context of an office party, shortly before the boss is heard giving the punchline "Twenty dollars Sister, same as in town.".

The 1989 video game  Leisure Suit Larry III: Passionate Patti in Pursuit of the Pulsating Pectorals  features a law firm by this name, though only the second partner, Suzi Cheatem, makes an actual appearance in the game.

The novel  The Plague Dogs  by  Richard Adams  features a firm of architects by the name of "Sir Conham Goode, Son, and Howe".

In an episode of  White Collar  (Season 01 Episode 09, time index 0:05:41) the document that has the Judge's ID stamp lists the Plaintiff as being represented by "Donald Dewey of the law firm Dewey, Chetham and Howe".

In the video game,  The Sims 4 , Sims in the Business career go to work at the "Dewey, Cheatem & Howe" offices.