Dickinson Bayou  is a bayou in  Texas .

Dickinson Bayou is located in southeast Texas in the San Jacinto-Brazos Coastal Basin. Dickinson Bayou rises two miles northeast of  Alvin  in northwestern  Galveston County  (at 29°29' N, 95°14' W) and flows east for over 20 miles to its mouth on Dickinson Bay and  Galveston Bay , just south of  San Leon  and a mile east of the  Southern Pacific Railroad  (at 29°28' N, 94°57' W). It traverses flat to rolling prairie surfaced by dark, commonly calcareous clays that support  mesquite , grasses, and  cacti . In the lower reaches of the bayou the soil changes to sandy and clay loams that support scrub brush, hardwoods, and pines.

Major named tributaries that flow to Dickinson Bayou include Gum Bayou, Benson Bayou, Magnolia (Geisler) Bayou, Bordens Gully, Cedar Creek, and LaFlore’s Bayou.

Dickinson Bayou is on the state’s list of water bodies not meeting water quality standards for dissolved oxygen (DO) and bacteria levels. As a result, the nayou does not meet its aquatic life use nor its contact recreation use, creating a possible environmental and/ or public health concern.

Residents of Dickinson still take the time and the slight risk to enjoy many of the bayou's activities. Those who do so engage in fishing, canoeing, water skiing, swimming, and sight seeing.

Fishing is a popular activity for those visiting Dickinson Bayou. In dry summers drought the water becomes saltier and produces many smaller saltwater fish not usually seen in  brackish water . These include  ladyfish ,  redfish ,  croaker ,  piggy perch , and an occasional  speckled trout . In the winter months, flounder make an appearance in the section of the bayou closest to the bay. Spring brings out small largemouth bass and catfish in the lower reaches of the bayou.

The bayou plays host to the Festival of Lights every Christmas at Paul Hopkins Park. This proves perfect as the nearly 1 million lights reflect from the bayou's murky waters.

For a complete listing, see  list of cities and towns in Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land MSA