" Do It All Over Again " is the debut single by  British  pop singer  Elyar Fox . The song was released in the  United Kingdom  as a digital download on 10 January 2014 as the lead single from his debut studio album.

A music video to accompany the release of "Do It All Over Again" was first released onto YouTube on 10 December 2013 at a total length of three minutes and thirty-three seconds. [2]  The video shows Elyar performing the track in a massive aircraft hangar, while fans upload videos of themselves to YouTube dancing to the song. It references his own journey from performing covers on YouTube from his bedroom to filming a major label music video. [3]

Talking to  Digital Spy  about the premiere of his song he said, "I was a little bit nervous, Obviously I was confident about it because I like the song because I wrote it, but I was like, 'What is everyone going to think?'". Talking about the song he said, "It's pop with a bit of the club element, but it still has guitars in as that's my roots. The rest of the album has different sides to it as such. There's an acoustic reggae side and then there's a slightly edgier rock side to it." [3]

Alexandra Pattinson of  Fortitude Magazine  gave the song a positive review:

"A bouncing bassline and innocent pop vocals are the main focus of the track but there is a strong beat behind it provided by synths and electronics. 'Do It All Over Again' is a great catchy pop track that will no doubt be the first big club smash of next year. With a bit more of an urban edge than other artists in his age range, Elyar Fox could have just enough individuality to survive the tough industry." [4]

Robert Copsey of  Digital Spy  gave the song a negative review stating:

"18-year-old rising star Elyar Fox has been on our radar for quite some time now, but if we're honest, we're not entirely sure about his prospects as 2013's breakout act. It could be because there are already plenty of other above-average male artists already dominating the charts, or maybe it's because he's yet another new artist to be discovered via the medium of YouTube; a backstory that feels a little too '2012' for our liking. Then again, based on his debut single, it could be his incessant over-eagerness to present himself as the perfect pop package. Between its clichéd lyrics ("Let's go to a place we've never been before/ I wanna see it all"), the slick but dated electro whirring production and toe-curling music video that charts his rise from bedroom singer to selfie-obsessed popstar, 'Do It All Over Again' is the last thing we want to do at the start of 2014."  [5]

The song has peaked at number 5 on the  UK Singles Chart  and number 83 on the  Irish Singles Chart .