Donald Ellis Wildmon [1]  (born January 18, 1938) is an ordained United Methodist minister, author, former radio host, and founder and chairman emeritus of the  American Family Association  and  American Family Radio .

Wildmon was born in  Dumas, Mississippi , the son of Johnnie Bernice (née Tigrett), a schoolteacher, and Ellis Clifton Wildmon, a civil servant. [2] [3]  Wildmon graduated from  Millsaps College  in 1960. In 1961, he married Lynda Lou Bennett, with whom he has two sons and two daughters. From 1961 to 1963, he served in the  U.S. Army . He gained his  Master of Divinity  (MDiv.) from  Emory University 's  Candler School of Theology  in 1965. [4]  He was ordained as a  minister  of the  United Methodist Church  in 1964 and served as a pastor until 1977, when he left the pastoral ministry to campaign against pornography and violence in the media.

In June 1977, he moved to  Tupelo, Mississippi , to establish the National Federation for Decency (NFD), the predecessor to the modern American Family Association, because after watching television one night in December 1976 he felt that no primetime television program was appropriate for his family with young children. [5] [6]  With a membership of 1,400, NFD's first television advertiser boycott was during spring 1978 and against  Sears  for sponsoring  All in the Family ,  Charlie's Angels , and  Three's Company . [7]  Sears withdrew sponsorship of the latter two programs.

In February 1980, Wildmon founded the Coalition for Better Television (CBTV), this time with the help of  Jerry Falwell  and claiming a nationwide membership of 5 million. [5] [8]  However, following a dispute with Falwell, the organization disbanded two years later. That same year, Wildmon formed a new organization, Christian Leaders for Responsible Television (CLEAR-TV).

Wildmon's son Tim is president of AFA and ran a news organization called Agape Press, which went offline in early 2007, when it merged with AFR News to create online newswire  One News Now .

Throughout the late 1970s, Wildmon actively protested television series that he thought promoted immoral lifestyles. He spoke against such programs as  Three's Company ,  M*A*S*H  and  Dallas . [9]

Other productions and organizations against which he has campaigned include:

Up until mid-April 2007, Wildmon hosted the daily radio program  AFA Report , which can be heard weekdays on AFR or anytime on AFR's website. Wildmon left the program because he felt he didn't have adequate time to prepare for it each day, and he needed more time to fulfill other duties. He returned to the program in late April 2008, after receiving letters from listeners asking for him to come back, and after expansions in staff and studio space allowed him more preparation time. In early September, however, Wildmon suddenly left the program once again, this time for undisclosed reasons. He also hosted  My Turn with Don Wildmon , a short devotional segment, which no longer airs.

In 1991, the British film  Damned in the USA , directed by  Paul Yule , chronicled the battle between Wildmon and artists  Andres Serrano  and  Robert Mapplethorpe . The documentary received several awards, including the International Emmy for Best Documentary. After a distributor got the rights to show the film in the United States, Wildmon sued the producers for $8 million in damages, stating that he had a contract with the producers that prevented distribution in the USA. A federal court found that Wildmon's contract did not support his claim concerning distribution of the film. [10]

On August 18, 2009, Tim Wildmon released the news via email that his father had been admitted to the North Mississippi Medical Center in Tupelo over the weekend of August 15–16, with what was thought to be a serious case of  meningitis . After running tests, however, doctors determined that he had  St. Louis encephalitis , a disease usually contracted from mosquitoes. He spent 121 days in the hospital and rehab, and later underwent surgery for cancer on his left eye. On March 3, 2010, it was announced that Wildmon was stepping down as chairman of the American Family Association. His son Tim was expected to become the new chairman. [11]