Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge  (DESFBNWR) is a United States  National Wildlife Refuge  located in the southern part of  San Francisco Bay ,  California . The Refuge headquarters and visitor center is located in the Baylands district of  Fremont , next to  Coyote Hills Regional Park , in  Alameda County . The visitor center is on Marshlands Rd, off Thornton Ave. [2]

Most of the refuge stretches along the  marshy  shoreline north and south of the  Dumbarton Bridge , but  Bair Island , in  San Mateo County , is also part of the system. The southernmost extent of the refuge is in northern  Santa Clara County .

It was founded in 1974 as the first urban National Wildlife Refuge established in the United States, and it is dedicated to preserving and enhancing wildlife habitat, protecting migratory birds, protecting threatened and endangered species, and providing opportunities for wildlife-oriented recreation and nature study for the surrounding communities.

As of 2004, the Refuge spanned 30,000 acres (120 km 2 ) of open bay, salt pond, salt marsh, mudflat, upland and vernal pool habitats located throughout south San Francisco Bay. About 9,000 acres (36 km 2 ) of salt ponds within the refuge are managed by  Cargill  Salt, which has perpetual salt-making rights. Cargill uses the salt ponds to concentrate brines as part of its solar salt operation which produces salt for food, agriculture, medical, and industrial uses throughout the Western United States.

Located along the  Pacific Flyway , the Refuge hosts over 280 species of birds each year. The variety of birds that may call the refuge home or as a stopover consist of the white pelicans, kites, hawks, ospreys, and eagles. Millions of shorebirds and waterfowl stop to refuel at the Refuge during the spring and fall migration. In addition to its seasonal visitors, the Refuge provides critical habitat to resident species like the endangered  California clapper rail  and  salt marsh harvest mouse . Today, hundreds of thousands of people visit the Refuge each year to enjoy its diverse wildlife and habitats.

The Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge is one of six wildlife refuges in the  San Francisco Bay Area . The others are:  Antioch Dunes ,  Ellicott Slough ,  Farallon ,  Marin Islands , and  San Pablo Bay . It was renamed Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge in 1995 in recognition of Congressman  Don Edwards  and his efforts to protect sensitive wetlands in south San Francisco Bay.

The sign at the entrance to the Refuge

Near the Visitors' Center

Ecotone , 2005

Freshwater slough and dry hill, Summer, 2005

Salt evaporation ponds , with the  Dumbarton Bridge  in the background

Birds in the salt pond

This article incorporates  public domain material  from websites or documents of the  United States Fish and Wildlife Service .