" Down by the Glenside (The Bold Fenian Men) " is an  Irish rebel song  written by  Peadar Kearney , an  Irish Republican  and composer of numerous rebel songs, including " The Soldier's Song " ( "Amhrán na bhFiann "), now the Irish  National Anthem  and "The Tri-coloured Ribbon".

Kearney was a member of the  Irish Republican Brotherhood , popularly known as the  Fenians . He wrote the song about the time of the  1916 Rising . It evokes the memory of the  freedom-fighters  of the previous generation ( strong, manly forms...eyes with hope gleaming ), as recalled by an old woman  down by the  glenside . It is effectively a call to arms for a generation of Irishmen accustomed to political  nationalism .

Three verses to this song were sung by  Ken Curtis  (best known for his role as " Festus Haggen " in  Gunsmoke ) and  The Sons of the Pioneers  in the  1950   John Ford  movie  Rio Grande . [1]

Richard Dyer-Bennet  recorded the song on his first self produced LP Richard Dyer-Bennet 1, (1955). The song became popular again in the 1960s, when it was recorded by  The Clancy Brothers . It has since been recorded by numerous artists, including  The Dubliners ,  Cherish The Ladies ,  Omnia , and the  Screaming Orphans .

The song is also sung in the first episode of the BBC series  Days of Hope , written by  Jim Allen  and directed by  Ken Loach . An Irish barmaid is forced to sing after being sexually harassed by British soldiers and impresses them with her song.

'Twas down by the glenside, I met an old woman 
A-plucking young nettles, she ne’er saw me coming 
I listened a while to the song she was humming 
Glory O, Glory O, to the bold Fenian men 
 
'Tis fifty long years since I saw the moon beaming 
On strong manly forms, on eyes with hope gleaming 
I see them again, sure, in all my sad dreaming 
Glory O, Glory O, to the bold Fenian men. 
 
When I was a young girl, their marching and drilling 
Awoke in the glenside sounds awesome and thrilling 
They loved dear old Ireland, to die they were willing 
Glory O, Glory O, to the bold Fenian men. 
 
Some died by the glenside, some died near a stranger 
And wise men have told us their cause was a failure 
But they fought for old Ireland and never feared danger 
Glory O, Glory O, to the bold Fenian men 
 
I passed on my way, God be praised that I met her 
Be life long or short, sure I'll never forget her 
We may have brave men, but we'll never have better 
Glory O, Glory O, to the bold Fenian men