The  Eastside , in the context of the  King County ,  Washington ,  United States  area, is a collective term for the  suburbs  of  Seattle  located on the east side of  Lake Washington . In this context,  Westside  is synonymous with Seattle. In Washington State more broadly, the term  Eastside  refers to the part of the state east of the passes over the  Cascade Mountains , [1]  which can be a source of confusion since all of King County lies to the west of the Cascades.

The most common definitions of the Eastside include the cities of  Bellevue ,  Kirkland ,  Redmond ,  Sammamish ,  Issaquah ,  Newcastle , and  Mercer Island . [2] [3] [4]

The towns west of Bellevue, collectively known as the  Gold Coast , are usually considered part of the Eastside. These include  Beaux Arts Village ,  Clyde Hill ,  Hunts Point ,  Medina , and  Yarrow Point .

The Northshore cities of  Kenmore ,  Bothell , and  Woodinville  may be considered part of the Eastside, as each city contains portions that are east of the lake and south of its northernmost tip. Similarly, on the southeast tip of Lake Washington,  Renton  may also be included.

The most expansive definitions of the Eastside can include cities in the  Snoqualmie Valley , including  Duvall ,  Carnation ,  Fall City ,  Snoqualmie , and  North Bend .

In politics, the area is sometimes referred to as the "suburban crescent". [5]

The cities on the Eastside mostly began as centers of logging or mining in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In the years prior to World War II they became centers of dairy and berry farming. During the post-war boom, they became  bedroom communities  for Seattle. This was made possible by the 1940 construction of the  Lacey V. Murrow Memorial Bridge  across Lake Washington, as well as the later construction of the  Evergreen Point Floating Bridge  in 1963; additional traffic later led to the construction of an additional bridge paralleling the Murrow bridge,  Homer M. Hadley Memorial Bridge , as well as the  replacement of the Evergreen Point Floating Bridge . Currently, the area is growing several  edge cities .

Bellevue is the largest city on the Eastside and 5th largest in the state. A major technology center, the Eastside is home to many large high-tech companies, mainly in the  software  and  wireless  industries, including  Microsoft ,  T-Mobile US ,  Nintendo of America ,  AT&T Mobility  (formerly  Cingular ), the former  Western Wireless  (now part of  Verizon Wireless ),  Vulcan Ventures ,  Expedia, Inc. ,  180 Solutions  and  InfoSpace . Companies like  PACCAR ,  Puget Sound Energy ,  Symetra Insurance ,  Boeing ,  Verizon Wireless ,  Google ,  Yahoo ,  Walt Disney , and  Fox Sports  also have national, major divisional or regional offices in the Eastside. The Eastside is also a hub for biotech and medical companies including  Amgen ,  Icos , and  Merck . Many local magnates, including  Bill Gates ,  Paul Allen ,  Steve Ballmer ,  John Stanton , and  Craig McCaw , live in the Eastside's cities. The Eastside is also home to many video game and interactive media companies. These include  Bungie ,  Valve ,  ArenaNet ,  Sucker Punch ,  Monolith Productions ,  Sony Online Entertainment ,  Warner Brothers Entertainment ,  Microsoft Game Studios , and  DigiPen Institute of Technology .

Kirkland hosts the annual  Junior League Softball World Series . Kirkland Signature is also the  own brand  of  Costco , which was founded in Kirkland and continues to operate in the Eastside city of  Issaquah .

There are public and private airfields on the Eastside. Major facilities include:

There is also a landing zone for  paragliding  at the base of Tiger Mountain at  47°30′01.6″N   122°01′19.1″W ﻿ / ﻿ 47.500444°N 122.021972°W ﻿ /  47.500444; -122.021972 . [6]

The  Woodinville Subdivision  is a rail line built in the late 19th century. In 2008, the  Wilburton Tunnel  was eliminated, severing the line. The right-of-way was purchased the same year by the  Port of Seattle . [7]  Eastside cities and King County purchased portions of the Port property for conversion to a  rail trail  called the  Eastside Rail Corridor . [8]

The Eastside is connected to Seattle by the  Evergreen Point Floating Bridge  from Medina ( State Route 520 ) and the  Lacey V. Murrow Memorial Bridge  and  Third Lake Washington Bridge  from Bellevue via Mercer Island ( Interstate 90 ). It is also served by  Interstate 405 , a loop route of  Interstate 5  that runs to the east of Lake Washington from  Tukwila  to  Lynnwood .

Coordinates :  47°36′N   122°10′W ﻿ / ﻿ 47.600°N 122.167°W ﻿ /  47.600; -122.167