Evan Harris Walker  (1935 – August 17, 2006), was an American  physicist  and  parapsychologist . [1]

Walker was born in  Birmingham, Alabama . [2]  He received his Ph.D. in  physics  from the  University of Maryland  in 1964. He received over a dozen patents and published more than a hundred papers in scientific journals.

Walker said he had undergone a  Zen  enlightenment experience in 1966 while walking in a field at the  University of Maryland . This led him to reassess  quantum mechanics , finding its  indeterminacy  incomplete. [2]

He worked at the Ballistic Research Laboratories of the US Army's  Aberdeen Proving Ground  in Maryland. He wrote several articles which appeared in the Journal of  Arthur M. Young 's "Institute for the Study of Consciousness" ( founded in Berkeley in 1972). These papers greatly interested  Nick Herbert  and Saul-Paul Sirag, who invited him to talk to the  Fundamental Fysiks Group  in the mid-70s. [3]

In 1981, Walker founded the  Walker Cancer Research Institute , a  nonprofit organization  based in  Aberdeen, Maryland , which funds public awareness of the risk of  cancer  and research for a cure. [4]

Evan Harris Walker died, aged 70, on August 17, 2006, at Harford Memorial Hospital in  Havre de Grace, Maryland . [1]

Walker promoted [5]  the charge that  Albert Einstein  "stole"  special relativity  from his first wife,  Mileva Marić . (This claim has not been accepted by mainstream historians of science.) [Pais (1994), pp. 1–29; Holton (1996), pp. 177–193; Stachel (2002), p. 26-38; 39-55; Martinez, (2005), pp. 49–56.]

Walker believed that a quantum observer theory could explain  paranormal  phenomena. [1]

In 1979, Walker and Richard Mattuck published a  parapsychology  paper proposing a quantum explanation for  psychokinesis . Physicist  Victor J. Stenger  wrote that their explanation contained assumptions, not supported by any scientific evidence. According to Stenger their paper is "filled with impressive looking equations and calculations that give the appearance of placing psychokinesis on a firm scientific footing... Yet look what they have done. They have found the value of one unknown number (wavefunction steps) that gives one measured number (the supposed speed of PK-induced motion). This is numerology, not science." [6]

Martin Gardner  noted that Walker's parapsychological work was not supported by any scientific evidence and his  quantum mechanical  calculations to explain paranormal phenomena and  God  were an example of  pseudoscience . [7]  In 2000, Walker published  The Physics of Consciousness . The book attempts to describe how quantum mechanical processes may be responsible for the creation of human  consciousness . [1]  According to a review Walker believed something of us survives death and the book "opens the door to paranormal phenomena and God as  Quantum Mind ." [2]

(for a more complete list, see  APA Bio )