Everett McKinley Dirksen  (January 4, 1896 – September 7, 1969) was an  American  politician of the  Republican Party . He represented  Illinois  in the  House of Representatives  (1933–1949) and the  Senate  (1951–1969).

As  Senate Minority Leader  for a decade, he played a highly visible and key role in the politics of the 1960s, including helping write and pass the  Civil Rights Act of 1964  and the  Civil Rights Act of 1968 , both landmark pieces of legislation during the  Civil Rights Movement . Dirksen, a conservative, was one of the Senate's strongest supporters of the  Vietnam War  and was also known as "The Wizard of Ooze" because of his flamboyant oratorical style.

Dirksen was born in  Pekin, Illinois , a small city near  Peoria . He was the son of German immigrants Johann Friedrich Dirksen and his wife Antje Conrady. Everett had a fraternal twin, Thomas Dirksen, and a brother named Benjamin Harrison, a nod to the Republican leanings of his father. The boys' father died when the twins were nine years old.

Dirksen grew up on a farm on Pekin's outskirts, in a section called "Beantown" because immigrants grew beans instead of flowers. After attending the local schools, he entered the  University of Minnesota Law School  but dropped out during  World War I  to enlist in the  US Army . He served as a second lieutenant in a field artillery battery. [1]  He was a member of the  Reformed Church in America , founded in the 18th century by Dutch immigrants. [2]

After the war, Dirksen invested money in an electric washing machine business, but it failed. He joined his brothers in running a bakery. He expressed his artistic side by writing a number of unpublished short stories, as well as plays with former classmate Hubert Ropp. In addition, Dirksen was active in the  American Legion , and appearances on its behalf gave him the opportunity to hone his public speaking skills.

His political career began in 1926, when he was elected to the nonpartisan Pekin City Council. He placed first in field of eight candidates vying for four seats. At the time, the top votegetter also received appointment as the city's commissioner of accounts and finance, and Dirksen held both posts from 1927 to 1931. [3]

Dirksen was a  Freemason  and was a member of Pekin Lodge #29 in Pekin. In 1954, he was Grand Orator of the Grand Lodge of Illinois. He was honored with the  33rd degree  in 1954. [4]

After losing in the 1930 Republican primary, Dirksen won the nomination and the congressional seat in 1932 and was re-elected seven times. His support for many  New Deal  programs marked him as a moderate, pragmatic Republican. During  World War II , he lobbied successfully for an expansion of congressional staff resources to eliminate the practice under which House and Senate committees borrowed executive branch personnel to accomplish legislative work. Dirksen was able to secure the passage of an amendment to the  Lend Lease Act  by introducing a resolution while 65 of the House's Democrats were at a luncheon. It provided that the Senate and the House could, by a simple majority in a  concurrent resolution , revoke the powers granted to the President. [5]

Dirksen's penchant for changing his mind was noted by the  Chicago Sun-Times ,  which once noted that he had changed his mind 62 times on foreign policy matters, 31 times on military affairs, and 70 times on agricultural policies. [3]

Dirksen studied law privately in  Washington, D.C. , after he was elected. He was admitted to the District of Columbia Bar in 1936 and the bar of Illinois in 1937.

In December 1943, Dirksen announced that he would be a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in 1944. He stated that a coalition of midwestern Republican representatives had urged him to run and that his campaign was serious. However, press pundits had assumed that the candidacy was a vehicle to siphon support away from the campaign of  Wendell Willkie , whose reputation as a maverick and staunch internationalist had earned him the hatred of many Republican Party regulars, especially in the  Midwest . [6]  Dirksen's presidential campaign was apparently still alive on the eve of the 1944 convention, as  Time  speculated that he was running for vice-president. [7]  Dirksen received no votes for either office from delegates at the convention.

Dirksen continued to be re-elected. In 1947, he began to experience trouble in his right eye, which was diagnosed as  chorioretinitis . Despite a number of physicians (including one from  Johns Hopkins University ) recommending for the eye to be removed, Dirksen chose treatment and rest; he recovered most of the sight in that eye. In 1948, he declined to run for re-election because of his ailment. He returned to politics two years later and was popularly elected to the Senate from Illinois. [3]

Dirksen was elected as senator in 1950, when he unseated Senate Majority Leader  Scott W. Lucas . In the campaign, the support of  Wisconsin  Senator  Joseph McCarthy  helped Dirksen gain a narrow victory. As an ally of McCarthy, Dirksen tried but failed to get him to apologize for his misdeeds to stave off his censure in 1954, which Dirksen voted against. Dirksen's canny political skill, rumpled appearance, and convincing if sometimes flowery overblown oratory (which made his critics call him "the Wizard of Ooze") earned him a prominent national reputation.

In 1952, Dirksen supported the presidential candidacy of fellow Senator  Robert A. Taft  of  Ohio , the longtime leader of the Republican party's conservative wing. At the national party convention, Dirksen gave a speech attacking New York Governor  Thomas E. Dewey , a liberal Republican and the leading supporter of General  Dwight Eisenhower , the commander of the Allied forces in Europe in World War II and Taft's opponent for the Republican presidential nomination. During his speech, Dirksen pointed at Dewey on the convention floor and shouted, "Don't take us down the path to defeat again," [8]  a reference to Dewey's presidential defeats in 1944 and 1948. His speech was met by cheers from conservative delegates and loud boos from pro-Eisenhower delegates. After Eisenhower won the nomination, Dirksen then supported him.

In 1959, he was elected  Senate Minority Leader , defeating  Kentucky 's more liberal senator,  John Sherman Cooper , 20-14. Dirksen successfully united the various factions of the Republican Party by granting younger Republicans more representation in the Senate leadership and better committee appointments. He held the position of Senate Minority Leader until his death.

Along with  Charles Halleck  and later President  Gerald Ford  (the Republican Minority Leaders of the House), Dirksen was the official voice of the Republican Party during most of the 1960s. He discussed politics on television news programs. On several occasions, political cartoonist  Herblock  depicted Dirksen and Halleck as vaudeville song-and-dance men, wearing identical elaborate costumes and performing an act called "The Ev and Charlie Show."

Dirksen's voting record was consistently conservative on economic issues. He developed a good rapport with the Senate's majority leaders,  Lyndon B. Johnson  and  Mike Mansfield . On foreign policy he reversed his early isolationism to support the internationalism of Republican President Eisenhower and Democratic President  John F. Kennedy . He was a leading "hawk" on the issue of the  Vietnam War , a position he held well before President Johnson decided to escalate the war.

Dirksen said in February 1964:

First I agree that obviously we cannot retreat from our position in Vietnam. I have been out there three times, once as something of an emissary for then President Eisenhower. I took a good look at it. It is a difficult situation, to say the least. But we are in to the tune of some $350 million. I think the last figure I have seen indicates that we have over 15,500 military out there, ostensibly as advisers and that sort of thing. We are not supposed to have combatant troops, even though we were not signatories to the treaty that was signed at Geneva when finally they got that whole business out of the fire. But we are going to have to muddle through for a while and see what we do. Even though it costs us $1.5 million a day. [9] :59

As Johnson followed the recommendations and escalated the war, Dirksen gave him strong support in public and inside the Republican caucus. Some Republicans advised him that it would be to the party's advantage to oppose Johnson. Ford commented, "I strongly felt that although I agreed with the goals of the Johnson administration in Vietnam, I vigorously criticized their prosecution of the war. Now, Dirksen never took that same hard-line position that I took." [9] :149

In 1964, as Southern Democratic Senators staged a filibuster, which ran 54 days to block passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Dirksen,  Thomas Kuchel  (R-CA),  Hubert Humphrey  (D-MN), and  Mike Mansfield  (D-MT) introduced a substitute bill that they hoped would attract enough swing votes to end the filibuster. It was weaker than the House version, on the government's power to regulate the conduct of private business, but it was not so weak it would cause the House to reconsider the legislation. Also, the Department of Justice said the Mansfield-Dirksen Amendment would not prevent effective enforcement. However, Senator  Richard Russell, Jr.  (D-GA) refused to allow a vote on the amendment. Finally, Senator  Thruston Morton  (R-KY) proposed an amendment that guaranteed jury trials in all criminal contempt cases except voting rights. It was approved on June 9, and Humphrey made a deal with three Republicans to substitute it for the Mansfield-Dirksen Amendment in exchange for their supporting  cloture  on the  filibuster . Thus, after 57 days of filibuster, the substitute bill passed in the Senate, and the House-Senate conference committee agreed to adopt the Senate version of the bill. [10]

At that cloture vote, Dirksen said, " Victor Hugo  wrote in his diary substantially this sentiment: 'Stronger than all the armies is an idea whose time has come.' The time has come for equality of opportunity in sharing of government, in education, and in employment. It must not be stayed or denied." [11]

On March 22, 1966, Dirksen introduced a constitutional amendment to permit  public school  administrators providing for organized prayer by students; the introduction was in response to  Engel v. Vitale , which struck down the practice. Considered by opponents to violate the principle of  separation of church and state , the amendment was defeated in the Senate and gained only 49 affirmative votes, far short of the 67 votes a constitutional amendment. Dirksen was a firm opponent of the doctrine of  one man, one vote  on the grounds that large cities (such as  Chicago  in Dirksen's home state of Illinois) could render rural residents of a state powerless in their state governments; after the  Warren Court  imposed one-man-one-vote on all state legislative houses in  Reynolds v. Sims , he led an effort to convene an  Article V convention  for an amendment to the Constitution that would allow for legislative districts of unequal population. [12]  Dirksen died before enough states passed resolutions for the convention, by which point the court-ordered re-engineered legislatures began repealing their predecessors' resolutions.

Dirksen is noted as saying, "A billion here, a billion there, pretty soon, you're talking real money." Although there is no direct record of the remark, [13]  he is believed to have made it during an appearance on  The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson . Dirksen is also quoted as having said, "The mind is no match with the heart in persuasion; constitutionality is no match with compassion." (See  wikiquotes of Everett Dirksen .)

Dirksen was also known for his fondness for the  common marigold . When political discussions became tense, he would lighten the atmosphere by taking up his perennial campaign to have the marigold named the national flower, but it never succeeded. In 1972 his hometown of Pekin started holding an annual  Marigold Festival  in his memory. It now identifies itself as the "Marigold Capital of the World."

Dirksen recorded four spoken-word albums. Collaborating with  Charles Osgood  and composer  John Cacavas , he produced a single, "Gallant Men" (1966), released by  Capitol Records , speaking his own poem. The same-named album reached #16 on the U.S.  Billboard  charts and won a  Grammy Award for Best Documentary Recording  in 1968. On January 7, 1967, Dirksen at 71 years 3 days old became the oldest person to reach the  Billboard  Hot 100 's top 40 when the single reached #33; two weeks later it reached #29. [14]  That distinction passed to  Moms Mabley  with her recording of " Abraham, Martin and John " peaking at #35 on 19 July 1969 when she was 75 years 4 months old. [15]   Gordon Sinclair , at the even older age than Dirksen of 73 years 8 months 6 days, eclipsed Dirksen's peak when Sinclair's version of " The Americans " peaked at #24 on 9 February 1974. [16]

Dirksen made TV guest appearances on game and variety shows, such as  What's My Line ,  The Hollywood Palace  and  The Red Skelton Show . Dirksen made a  cameo appearance  in the 1969 film  The Monitors , a low-budget science-fiction movie in which invading extraterrestrials assert political dominion over the human race. He also appeared in several other movies.

In August 1969, chest x-rays disclosed an asymptomatic peripherally located mass in the upper lobe of the right lung. Dirksen entered  Walter Reed Army Hospital  for surgery, which was undertaken on September 2. A right upper  lobectomy  removed what proved to be lung cancer ( adenocarcinoma ). Mr. Dirksen initially did well, but progressive complications developed into  bronchopneumonia . He suffered a cardiopulmonary arrest and died on September 7, 1969, at age 73.

His remains were returned to Pekin, and interred at Glendale Memorial Gardens, joined by those of his wife a decade later. [17]

Dirksen's widow, Louella, died of cancer on July 16, 1979. Their daughter Joy, the first wife of Senator  Howard Baker  of Tennessee, died of cancer on April 24, 1993.