Felice Romani  (31 January 1788 – 28 January 1865) was an  Italian   poet  and scholar of literature and  mythology  who wrote many  librettos  for the opera  composers   Donizetti  and  Bellini . Romani was considered the finest Italian librettist between  Metastasio  and  Boito . [1] [2]

Born Giuseppe Felice Romani to a  bourgeois  family in  Genoa , he studied law and literature in  Pisa  and Genoa. [3]  At the  University of Genoa  he translated French literature and, with a colleague, prepared a six-volume dictionary of mythology and antiquities, including the history of the  Celts  in Italy. Romani's expertise in French and antiquity is reflected in the libretti he wrote; the majority are based on French literature and many, such as  Norma , use mythological sources.

After refusing a post at the University of Genoa, he appears to have travelled to  France ,  Spain ,  Greece  and  Germany  before returning to  Milan  in either 1812 or 1813. [3]  There he became friends with important figures in the literary and musical world. He turned down the post of court poet in  Vienna , and began instead a career as opera librettist. He wrote two librettos for the composer  Simon Mayr , which resulted in his appointment as the librettist for  La Scala . Romani became the most highly regarded of all Italian librettists of his age, producing nearly one hundred. In spite of his interest in French literature, he refused to work in  Paris .

Romani wrote the librettos for Bellini's  Il pirata ,  La straniera ,  Zaira ,  I Capuleti e i Montecchi ,  La sonnambula ,  Norma  and  Beatrice di Tenda , for  Rossini 's  Il turco in Italia  and  Bianca e Falliero , and Donizetti's  Anna Bolena  and  L'elisir d'amore  (which he adapted from  Eugène Scribe 's  Le philtre ). He also wrote a libretto (originally for composer  Adalbert Gyrowetz ) that  Verdi  used for his early comedy  Un giorno di regno .

Romani was considered an ideal match for Bellini, who is quoted as having said: "Give me good verses and I will give you good music". Dramatic, even extravagant "situations" expressed in verses "designed to portray the passions in the liveliest manner" was what Bellini was looking for in a libretto, according to a letter to  Francesco Florimo , of 4 August 1834, and he found them in Romani.

The two, however, had a falling out over missed deadlines for  Beatrice di Tenda. . After setting  I puritani  to a libretto by  Carlo Pepoli , Bellini was determined not to compose any more Italian operas with anyone but Romani.  I puritani  was his last opera; he died less than a year after its première. Romani mourned him deeply and wrote an obituary in which he expressed his profound regrets over their disagreement.

In 1834 Romani became editor of the  Gazzetta Ufficiale Piemontese  to which he contributed literary criticism. He retained the post, with a break 1849–1854, until his death, in  Moneglia , (in the region of  Liguria , Italy). A volume of his lyric poems was published in 1841.

For each libretto the composer/s are listed who set it to music, the date of the first performance, and the new title where applicable.