Ukraine  has formal relations with many nations and in recent decades has been establishing diplomatic relations with an expanding circle of nations. The  foreign relations of Ukraine  are guided by a number of key priorities outlined in the  foreign policy of Ukraine .

Ukraine  considers Euro-Atlantic integration its primary foreign policy objective, but in practice balances its relationship with Europe and the United States with strong ties to Russia. The  European Union 's Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) with Ukraine went into force on March 1, 1998. The European Union (EU) has encouraged Ukraine to implement the PCA fully before discussions begin on an association agreement. The EU Common Strategy toward Ukraine, issued at the EU Summit in December 1999 in  Helsinki , recognizes Ukraine's long-term aspirations but does not discuss association. On January 31, 1992, Ukraine joined the then-Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (now the  Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe —OSCE), and on March 10, 1992, it became a member of the  North Atlantic Cooperation Council . Ukraine also has a close relationship with  NATO  and has declared interest in eventual membership. It is the most active member of the  Partnership for Peace  (PfP). Former President  Viktor Yushchenko  indicated that he supports Ukraine joining the EU in the future. Plans for Ukrainian membership to NATO were shelved by Ukraine following the  2010 Ukrainian presidential election  in which  Viktor Yanukovych  was elected  President . [1]  Yanukovych opted to keep Ukraine a non-aligned state. [2]  This materialized on June 3, 2010 when the  Ukrainian parliament  (Verkhovna Rada) excluded, with 226 votes, the goal of "integration into Euro-Atlantic security and NATO membership" from the country's national security strategy giving the country a non-aligned status. [3] [4]  " European integration " has remained part of Ukraine's national security strategy and co-operation with NATO was not excluded. [4]  Ukraine then considered relations with NATO as a partnership. [5] [6]  Ukraine and NATO continued to hold joint seminars and joint tactical and strategical exercises. [7] [8]  After February 2014's  Yanukovych ouster  and following the  Russian military intervention in Ukraine  (which Russia denies) Ukraine renewed its drive for NATO membership. [3]  On 23 December 2014 the Verkhovna Rada abolished, with 303 votes, Ukraine's non-aligned status. [3]

Ukraine maintains peaceful and constructive relations with all its neighbors [ citation needed ] ; it had especially close ties with Russia and Poland. Relations with the former are complicated by energy dependence and by payment arrears. However, relations have improved with the 1998 ratification of the bilateral  Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation . Also, the two sides have signed a series of agreements on the final division and disposition of the former  Soviet   Black Sea Fleet  that have helped to reduce tensions. Ukraine became a (non-official) member of the  Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS) on December 8, 1991, but in January 1993 it refused to endorse a draft charter strengthening political, economic, and defense ties among CIS members, and completely ceased to participate as a member in March 2014. Ukraine was a founding member of  GUAM  ( Georgia - Ukraine - Azerbaijan - Moldova ).

In 1999–2001, Ukraine served as a non-permanent member of the  UN Security Council . Historically, Soviet Ukraine joined the United Nations in 1945 as one of the original members following a Western compromise with the Soviet Union, which had asked for seats for all 15 of its union republics. Ukraine has consistently supported peaceful, negotiated settlements to disputes. It has participated in the quadripartite talks on the conflict in Moldova and promoted a peaceful resolution to conflict in the post-Soviet state of Georgia. Ukraine also has made a substantial contribution to UN  peacekeeping  operations since 1992.

Leonid Derkach  (chairman of the SBU, which is Ukraine's security service, successor to the KGB) was fired due to Western pressure after he organized the sale of radar systems to Iraq while such sales were embargoed. [9]

The 1997 boundary treaty with  Belarus  remains un-ratified due to unresolved financial claims, stalling demarcation and reducing border security.

Delimitation of the land boundary with Russia is incomplete, but the parties have agreed to defer demarcation. The  maritime boundary  through the  Sea of Azov  and the  Kerch Strait  remains unresolved despite a December 2003 framework agreement and on-going expert-level discussions.  Prime Minister   Vladimir Putin  allegedly declared at a  NATO -Russia summit in 2008 that if  Ukraine would join NATO  his country can contend to annex the  Ukrainian East  and  Crimea . [10]

Starting in November 2013, the decision by Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych to back out of signing an integration agreement with the  European Union  started a  period of civil unrest  between  Ukrainians who favored integration with the European Union  and  those who wanted closer ties with Russia . This culminated in the  2014 Ukrainian Revolution . Russia took advantage of this political instability to  annex Crimea  in March 2014, though  Ukraine still claims sovereignty over the territory .  Russia has also allegedly supported of separatist forces  in the  War in Donbass . In December 2015 Russian hackers reportedly  hacked Ukraine's power grids  leading to a blackout and widespread terror.

Moldova  and Ukraine have established joint customs posts to monitor transit through Moldova's break-away  Transnistria  Region which remains under  OSCE  supervision.

Ukraine and  Romania  have  settled their dispute  over the Ukrainian-administered  Zmiyinyy (Snake) Island  and the Black Sea maritime boundary at the  International Court of Justice . The 2010 CIA World Factbook states that "Romania opposes Ukraine's reopening of a navigation canal from the  Danube  border through Ukraine to the  Black Sea ". [ citation needed ]

State enterprise  InvestUkraine  was created [11]  under the  State Agency for Investment and National Projects  ( National Projects ) [12]  to serve as a  One Stop Shop  for investors and to deliver investment consulting services.

The Eastern Partnership is meant to complement the  Northern Dimension  by providing an institutionalised forum for discussing visa agreements, free trade deals and strategic partnership agreements with the EU's eastern neighbours.

February

Azerbaijan  plays an important role in the foreign policy of Ukraine due its strategic role. Both countries are among the founding members of  GUAM  and after the independence from  Soviet Union , they've remained very close friendship. The relations of strategic cooperation, political, economical and cultural relations between two countries are at very high level. Azerbaijan has an embassy in  Kiev . [19]  Ukraine has an embassy in  Baku . [20]  There are about 32.000 Ukrainians live in Azerbaijan, while there are over 45,000  Azerbaijanis in Ukraine . The two countries support each other in entering international organizations. [21]  Ukraine supports the peaceful resolution of the conflict of the  Nagorno-Karabakh  conflict within the framework of Azerbaijan's territorial integrity and ready to take part in possible peacekeeping operation under the mandate of the  United Nations . Azerbaijan also helped Ukraine in to shelter Chernobyl sarcophagus.

China has an embassy in  Kiev  and a Consulate-General in  Odessa . Ukraine has an embassy in Beijing and a Consulate-General in Shanghai. Chinese Ukrainian trade relations have intensified since 2008 [22]  and are growing, for instance various Chinese companies are interested in investing in the construction of a large  orbital road  around Kiev and in building a number of bridges across the  Dnipro River . [23]  China intends to provide a loan of 25 million  yuan  (about  USD  3.7 million) to Ukraine. [24]

Since their independence from the Soviet Union, both countries consider each other as strategic partners and have forged close political and cultural relations. During the  Shevardnadze  era, the Georgian government maintained its close relations with Ukraine. However, the relationship has further enhanced after  Rose Revolution  in Georgia and  Orange Revolution  in Ukraine. During the Orange Revolutions, many Georgians rallied in  Kiev  in support of Viktor Yushchenko. Both countries maintain pro-western political orientation and aspire to join  NATO  and the  European Union . The close friendship between Presidents  Mikheil Saakashvili  and  Viktor Yushchenko  has also played an important role in recent political and cultural unity of the two countries. However, the cultural and political unity between two nations existed long ago. There are many cultural events in both courtiers, celebrating close relations between Georgian and Ukrainian people. In 2007, Georgians unveiled a statue to  Taras Shevchenko  in Tbilisi while Ukrainians erected the statue of Georgia’s epic poet  Shota Rustaveli  in Kiev.

The Indian Embassy in  Kiev  was opened in May 1992 and  Ukraine  opened its Mission in New Delhi in February 1993. The Consulate General of India in  Odessa  functioned from 1962 till its closure in March 1999.

Ukraine has an embassy in  Baghdad  and Iraq has an embassy in  Kiev . A small contingent of Ukraine operated in Iraq in the wake of the  invasion of Iraq  mainly concerning police work and reconstruction.

Japan extended diplomatic recognition to the Ukrainian state on December 28, 1991, immediately after the breakup of the  Soviet Union  and full diplomatic relations were established on January 26, 1992. Ukraine maintains an embassy in Tokyo, [27]  and Japan maintains an embassy in  Kiev . [28]

New Zealand recognized Ukraine as independent state on 27 February 1992 Diplomatic relations between the two countries were established on March 3, 1992. Since 2015, the New Zealand Embassy in Warsaw (Poland) has been accredited to act as New Zealand's embassy to Ukraine. Since October 2008 the Honorary Consulate of New Zealand operates in Kyiv. In December 2007 The Embassy of Ukraine in Australia was accredited to act as Ukraine's embassy for New Zealand. In April 2006 New Zealand's Minister for Foreign Affairs paid an official visit Ukraine. [34]

Turkey and Ukraine have a long chronology of historical, geographic, and cultural contact. Diplomatic relations between both countries were established in early 1990s when Turkey became one of the first states in the world to announce officially about recognition of sovereign Ukraine. Turkey has an embassy in  Kiev  and a consulate general in  Odessa . [43]  Ukraine has an embassy in  Ankara  and a consulate general in  Istanbul . [44]

Ukraine includes a great deal of territory (some later part of Poland or  Czechoslovakia  before 1939) that used to be part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire:  Lviv Oblast ,  Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast ,  Ternopil Oblast , most of the  Chernivtsi Oblast  and the  Zakarpattia Oblast . Austria has an embassy in  Kiev  and 3 honorary consulates (in  Donetsk ,  Kharkiv  and  Lviv ). Ukraine has an embassy in  Vienna  and 2 honorary consulates (in  Klagenfurt  and  Salzburg ).

Today, the two countries share 891 km of border. Belarus has an embassy in  Kiev  and an honorary consulate in  Lviv [45]  Ukraine has an embassy in  Minsk  and a general consulate in  Brest . [46]  Both countries are full members of the  Baku Initiative ,  Common Economic Space ,  Central European Initiative  and  Commonwealth of Independent States .

Belgium has an embassy in  Kiev ; Ukraine has an embassy in  Brussels  and two honorary consulates (in  Antwerp  and  Mons ). Although politically the two nations are not closely connected, they have a long history of economic integration and trade, with Belgian investment playing a role in the contemporary Ukrainian economy. As of 2008, trade revenue generated between the two nations accounted for approximately  USD 1 billion.

Both countries established diplomatic relations in 1992. Bulgaria has an embassy in  Kiev  and a Consulate-General in  Odessa . [47]  Ukraine has an embassy in  Sofia  and a Consulate-General in  Varna .

The Maltese embassy in Moscow (Russia) is also accredited as a non resident embassy to Ukraine. Ukraine is represented in Malta through its embassy in Rome (Italy).

Ukraine opened an Embassy in  Chişinău  in [ citation needed ]  and a Consulate in  Balti  in 2005. The Ukrainian ambassador in  Chişinău  is Serhiy Pirozhkov. The border between Moldova and Ukraine is 985 kilometers. Ukrainians are the second largest ethnicity group in Moldova after ethnic Moldavians. There are 442,346 of Ukrainians in Moldova, which represents 11.2% of the population. Moldavians are the fourth ethnic minority in Ukraine [ citation needed ] . As of 2001 Ukrainian Census, there were 258,600 Moldavians in Ukraine [ citation needed ]  – which represents 0,5% of the Ukrainian population. For 70.0% of  Moldavian  speaking Ukrainians [ citation needed ] , Russian 17.6% and  Ukrainian  10.7% are the native languages.

Ukraine recognized the Republic of Montenegro on June 15, 2006. [63]  Both countries established diplomatic relations on August 22, 2006. The Ukrainian embassy in Belgrade (Serbia) is accredited as a non resident embassy to Montenegro. In 2008, both countries indicated an intent to open resident embassies. [64]

Poland was the first country in the World to recognize Ukrainian independence. The relations have been improving since, with Poland and Ukraine forming a strong strategic partnership. [69]  Various controversies from their shared history occasionally resurface in Polish-Ukrainian relations, but they are not having a major influence on the bilateral relations of Poland and Ukraine. [70]

Both countries share a border of about 529 km. [71]  Poland's acceptance of the  Schengen Agreement  created problems with the Ukrainian border traffic. On July 1, 2009 an agreement on  local border traffic  between the two country's came into effect. This agreement enables Ukrainian citizens living in border regions to cross the Polish frontier according to a liberalized procedure. [72]

Russia has an  embassy  in  Kiev  and  consulates  in  Kharkiv ,  Lviv ,  Odessa  and  Simferopol . Ukraine has an  embassy  in Moscow and  consulates  in  Rostov-on-Don ,  Saint Petersburg ,  Tyumen  and  Vladivostok . Relations between the two country's governments have been unfriendly since the presidency of  Leonid Kuchma  expired.  Prime Minister   Vladimir Putin  allegedly declared at a  NATO -Russia summit in 2008 that  if Ukraine would join NATO  his country can contend to annex the  Ukrainian East  and  Crimea . [10]  Some analysts believe that the current Russian leadership is determined to prevent a Russian equivalent of the Ukrainian  Orange Revolution  in Russia. This mindset is supposed to explain not only Russian domestic policy but its sensitivity over events abroad as well. [74]  Many in Ukraine and beyond believe that  Russia has periodically used its vast energy resources  to bully its smaller, dependent neighbour, but the  Russian Government  argues instead that it is internal squabbling amongst  Ukraine's political  elite that is to blame for the deadlock. [75]  Later Putin stated that the government of the Russian Federation respects the sovereignty of Ukraine, while several Russian parliamentaries as well some governors were urging the liquidation of Ukraine. Starting in November 2013, the decision by Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych to back out of signing an integration agreement with the  European Union  started a  period of civil unrest  between  Ukrainians who favored integration with the European Union  and  those who wanted closer ties with Russia . This culminated in the  2014 Ukrainian Revolution . Russia took advantage of this political instability to  annex Crimea  in March 2014, though  Ukraine still claims sovereignty over the territory .  Russia has also allegedly supported of separatist forces  in the  War in Donbass . In December 2015 Russian hackers reportedly  hacked Ukraine's power grids  leading to a blackout and widespread terror.

Contacts between Switzerland and Ukraine go back to Tsarist times. Switzerland recognized Ukraine in 1991 and immediately opened an embassy in  Kiev . [83]  Ukraine has an embassy in  Bern . [84] [85]

Both countries have established diplomatic relations on 1 October 1999. [88]

Diplomatic relations were established between Canada and Ukraine on January 27, 1992. [89]  Canada opened its  embassy  in  Kiev [90]  in April 1992, and the  Embassy of Ukraine in Ottawa  opened in October of that same year, paid for mostly by donations from the Ukrainian-Canadian community. Ukraine opened a  consulate general  in Toronto in 1993 and announced plans to open another in  Edmonton  in 2008. [91]  Canada also has a  consulate  in  L'viv .

Both countries established diplomatic relations on 21 May 1993. [94]

The United States enjoys cordially friendly and strategic relations with Ukraine and attaches great importance to the success of Ukraine's transition to a democratic state with a flourishing free market economy. [95]

Brazil and Ukraine are  strategic partners  and cooperate in  trade ,  space technology ,  education ,  energy ,  healthcare , and  defense . [99]   Brazil  recognized  Ukraine 's independence on December 26, 1991, and bilateral relations were established on February 11, 1992. [100]  The recent development of a joint  space industry  has strengthened the bilateral ties between the two countries. [99]  Ukraine considers Brazil its key trade partner in  Latin America  and has been a vocal supporter of the Brazilian bid for a permanent seat at the  United Nations Security Council . [99] [101]

Both countries established diplomatic relations on 15 November 2001. [102]