Fratton railway station  is a railway station in  Portsmouth , located near  Fratton Park , the  stadium  of  association football  (soccer) club  Portsmouth F.C. .

It is located on the  Portsmouth Direct Line  which runs between  London Waterloo  and  Portsmouth Harbour .

Normally, platforms 2 and 3 serve  Portsmouth & Southsea  and  Portsmouth Harbour , with platform 1 serving all other destinations. Platforms 2 and 3 are also signalled to allow northbound passenger departures.

The railway line through Fratton was planned by the  Brighton and Chichester Railway  as part of the Chichester to Portsmouth Branch Railway, approved in 1845. [2]  The line was completed in 1847, the Brighton and Chichester railway merging with several other companies to form the  London, Brighton and South Coast Railway  in 1846, who went on to operate the line. Fratton was once the junction for the  Southsea Railway  which closed in 1914.

After the Motive power depot closed in the late 1950s, some former sidings were used during the withdrawal of the South West Trains greyhound fleet around 2003. The same sidings were then used in 2007 [3]  and in 2009 for freight trials, this involved  DB Schenker Rail (UK)  hauling small container trains to and from eastleigh. [4]  The Idea was abandoned in 2010 due to running costs.

The Portsmouth Area Resignalling project was instigated in late 2006, aiming to improve the flexibility of the track layout in the Fratton area. Platform 1 became the Up Main, Platform 3 became the Down Main with Platform 2 as a bidirectional through platform (although the main function of platform 2 is down line trains). Prior to the project, trains could not reverse south to north at Fratton in service.

The work, scheduled by  Network Rail  to take place between 23 December 2006 and 4 February 2007, was subject to a massive overrun. The works were first extended six weeks into mid-March 2007 but in late February it became obvious that there were major problems with the new equipment being installed by the contractor  Siemens AG . [5]

Until 1 April 2007 there were only three trains per hour between Fratton and Portsmouth Harbour with the remaining services terminating at Fratton and passengers using a replacement bus service. After 2 April 2007 there were five trains per hour running between Fratton and Portsmouth - three  South West Trains  services, one  Southern  service and one  Great Western Railway  service with some services still terminating at Fratton with passengers forced to change to continue their journey. The "six-week project" was eventually completed in October 2007 - some ten months after it started.

A new footbridge is now operational, linking the island platform (platforms 2 and 3) with the Up Main platform (1). This has stairs and lifts to allow disabled users full access to all trains, with lifts designed for easy wheelchair use.

The  London Brighton and South Coast Railway  and the  London and South Western Railway  jointly built a motive power depot at Fratton in 1891, replacing an earlier one at  Portsmouth Town station . It was of the double  roundhouse  type. It came under the ownership of  Southern Railway (Great Britain)  in 1923 and  British Railways  in 1948. This building was badly damaged by bombs during the  Second World War  but repaired in 1948. It closed 2 November 1959, but the building continued to be used for stabling locomotives for several years. They were demolished in 1969. [6]  Fratton  Traction Maintenance Depot , operated by  South West Trains  now occupies part of the site.

Station approach

Same building looking from platform

Up platform

Marshalling yard

Rail Atlas Great Britain & Ireland, S.K. Baker  ISBN   0-86093-553-1