Frederick Etchells  (14 September 1886 - 1973) was an  English  artist and architect.

Etchells was born in  Newcastle upon Tyne . His early education was at the London School of Kensington, now known as  The Royal College of Art  where he studied on the Architectural course under  Professor Arthur Beresford Pite (1861-1934) and two years under  Professor Lethaby , [1]  which brought him into contact with the  Bloomsbury Group .

He was a contributor to the  Omega Workshops , but was one of those breaking away with  Wyndham Lewis ; [2]  this breakaway began the Rebel Art Centre, with the  Rebel Art Movement , somewhat akin to the  Dadaists  in Paris. The Rebel Art Movement transformed into the  Vorticists  several of his illustrations appeared in the issues of the  literary magazine   BLAST  of which there were only two issues. There was a Manifesto, which not all of the artists involved signed up to; Etchells himself excluded his name from the manifesto. However  William Roberts  later painted Etchells holding the copy of  BLAST  in his work " The Vorticists at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel, Spring 1915 ". [3]  Roberts wrote to Etchells wanting to confront Lewis about his prominence in the authorship of the magazine, to which Etchells declined since he no longer wanted anything to do with it. [4]  He, unlike many of the others from the Vorticists, remained acquainted with  Roger Fry . [5]

In his architectural practice, Etchells produced some modernist buildings, the most well known of is his designs was for 232–4 High Holborn, London (1929–30) for the advertising firm  WS Crawford Ltd. , a commission he had obtained through his friend  Ashley Havinden  (1903–73) who was the company’s art director from 1929. This was the first fully modernist office building in central London. Its clean façade was matched by a modern interior, complete with built-in furniture and stainless steel. Etchells main responsibility was the façade. [6] [7]

Etchells's most significant work is his translation of  Le Corbusier 's  Vers une architecture  known in its English title as  Towards a New Architecture : This has now been re-translated by John Goodman in his version  Toward an Architecture  2007. Etchells later translated another book of Corbusier's  Urbanisme , which in its English translation became  The City of Tomorrow . He gradually moved into architecture after a period of book publication, with the  Haslewood Press . [8]  Later he became a church and  conservation architect . He had close associations with  John Betjeman  who wrote his obituary. [9]  Betjeman was a tenant in one of Etchells's flats in Mayfair, this was during the period when Betjeman was a journalist with  The Architectural Review . One of his restorations was  St Andrew's Church, Plymouth ; he also restored  St George's Church, Donnington ,  West Sussex  after a fire in 1939, [10]  and  St James's Church, Abinger Common ,  Surrey  in 1950 after bomb damage during World War II. [11]

He contributed articles to the journal  The Studio. , though often anonymously and to  Artwork . [12]

He was an active member of the  Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings (SPAB) [9]  and a founding member of the  Georgian Group .

He was married to  Hester Margaret Sainsbury [13]  who was a book illustrator, painter and artist known for her performances to music.