The  German Rex  is a  breed  of  domestic cat .

The German Rex is a medium-sized breed with slender legs of a medium length. The head is round with well-developed cheeks and large, open ears. The eyes are of medium size in colours related to the coat colour. The coat is silky and short with a tendency to curl. The whiskers also curl, though less strongly than in the Cornish Rex. They may be nearly straight. All colours of coat, including white, are allowed. The body development is heavier than in the  Cornish Rex  - more like the  European Shorthairs .

A German Rex cat is very friendly and quickly bonds with its owner. It is lively, playful, and intelligent. Its temperament is much the same as a  Cornish Rex .

An early Rex-type cat from Germany was  Kater Munk , a cat of the family of one Erna Schneider, that was born 1930 or 1931 in a village near then- Königsberg ,  German Reich  (today's Kaliningrad,  Russia ).  Munk  was the son of a mahogany [ verification needed ]   Angora cat  and a  Russian Blue . There were one (some sources say two) other curly cat(s) in the litter which was castrated early.  Munk  spread his genes plentifully among the village's cat population till his death in 1944 or 1945. The Schneiders valued the strong tom with a penchant for catching fish from the family's garden pond for himself, not for his curly coat; he was, it seems, referred to colloquially as a  Preußig Rex  ("Prussian Rex", in local [ verification needed ]  dialect). German Rex researchers do not consider Kater Munk to be related to the German Rex breed [1]  and state that he was never bred.

In the summer of 1951, a doctor in  Berlin-Buch  ( Pankow  borough),  Rose Scheuer-Karpin , noticed a black curly-coated cat in the  Hufelandklinik  hospital garden. The clinic's personnel told her that they had known the cat since 1947. The doctor named the cat  Lämmchen  ( German  for "little lamb"). Her supposition that she must be the result of a mutation, was shown to be correct. Thus  Lämmchen  was the first breeder-owned Rex-type cat and the maternal ancestor of all the current German Rex.

The first two German Rex deliberately bred were two Rex kittens from a 1957 litter of four, offspring of  Lämmchen  and the straight-coated son  Fridolin  she had with a stray black tom  Blackie  adopted by Scheuer-Karpin.  Lämmchen  died on December 19, 1964 or in 1967, indicating she had been very young when first sighted in 1947. She left a number of Rex and  crossbred  descendants - the last one of her offspring was born in 1962 - most of which were used to improve other breeds such as the  Cornish Rex  which was suffering from skin problems due to being descended from genetically impoverished thoroughbred stock. In 1968, the lineage hinged on the efforts of the  GDR  cattery  vom Grund  who acquired the last 3 Rex offspring of  Lämmchen  not sold abroad, and amplified the lineage with  European Shorthair  and mixed-breeds. A stock was established in the West through the efforts of the  FRG   von Zeitz  cattery in 1973 which in the previous year had acquired their sample of the allele with the white female  crossbred   Silke vom Grund . After some years, the breed slowly became more plentiful.

Another Rex cat turned up in Berlin-Buch, apparently in the late 1950s. The tom named  Schnurzel  eventually contributed to German Rex breeding; it is not known how he related to  Lämmchen  but presumably he was a grandson of hers, as Scheuer-Karpin would let her cats roam free through the gardens and forests of Buch. Even in more recent times, the genetic legacy of  Lämmchen  if not  Munk  manifests itself on occasion in the Berlin area, such as  Pumina , found as a stray inage of  Preuss from Siegburg  which turned up in 1979 in the  Rhineland  town of  Siegburg  does not appear to be related to be a German Rex proper; it is almost certainly not related to  Lämmchen . Nonetheless, his descendants may have contributed to the German Rex lineage of today.

It is not certainly known how  Lämmchen  relates to  Munk , only that the German Rex mutation - on the same  gene  as in the  Cornish Rex  - is  recessive , meaning it will only show when both  alleles  are "Rex", and that  Munk  is the first thoroughly documented Rex cat, though as stories of "children cuddling curly coated kittens" [ citation needed ]  attest, Rex alleles turn up every now and then. Presumably,  Munk  sired many offspring with local cats, none of which would have had curly fur as the allele of  Munk' s straight-haired mates would dominate. In the following years, any curly-haired cats in the Königsberg area went unnoticed or at least were not bred on purpose; the allele nonetheless would have stood good chances to remain in the local cat population, as recessive alleles have a very low probability to disappear entirely.