Hazael  ( / ˈ h eɪ z i ə l / ;  Hebrew :  חֲזָהאֵל or חזאל [1] ḤaZa'eL ‎‎;  Aramaic , from the  triliteral   Semitic root   h-z-y , "to see"; his full name meaning, "God has seen") was a court official and later an  Aramean   king  who is mentioned in the  Bible . [2] [3]  Under his reign,  Aram-Damascus  became an empire that ruled over large parts of  Syria  and the Land of Israel. [4]

Hazael is first referred to by name in  1 Kings 19:15 . God tells the  prophet   Elijah  to anoint Hazael king over  Aram Damascus . Years after this, the Syrian king  Ben-Hadad II , probably identical to Hadadezer mentioned in the Tell Dan Stele, was ill and sent his court official Hazael with gifts to Elijah's successor  Elisha . Elisha asked Hazael to tell Hadadezer that he would recover, and he revealed to Hazael that the king would recover but would die of other means. The day after he returned to Hadadezer in  Damascus , Hazael suffocated him and seized power himself.

During his reign (c. 842–800 BC), [4]  King Hazael led the Arameans in battle against the forces of King  Jehoram  of  Israel  and King  Ahaziah  of  Judah . After defeating them at  Ramoth-Gilead , Hazael repelled two attacks by the  Assyrians , seized Israelite territory east of the  Jordan , the  Philistine  city of  Gath , and sought to take  Jerusalem  as well ( 2 Kings 12:17 ). Hazael's death is mentioned in  2 Kings 13:24 .

A monumental Aramaic inscription  discovered at  Tel Dan  is seen by most scholars as having been erected by Hazael, after he defeated the Kings of Israel and Judah. [5] [6]  Recent excavations at  Tell es-Safi / Gath  have revealed dramatic evidence of the siege and subsequent conquest of Gath by Hazael. The destruction of the settlement at  Tell Zeitah  during the ninth century may also be the result of Hazael's campaign. King  Joash of Judah  forestalled Hazael's invasion by bribing him with treasure from the royal palace and temple.

Decorated bronze plaques from chariot horse-harness taken from Hazael, identified by their inscriptions, have been found as re-gifted  votive objects  at two Greek sites, the  Heraion of Samos  and in the temple of Apollo at  Eretria  on  Euboea . The inscriptions read "that which  Hadad  gave to our lord Hazael from 'Umq in the year that our lord crossed the River". [7]  The river must be the  Orontes . The triangular front pieces show a " Master of the animals " [8]  gripping inverted sphinxes or lions in either hand, and with deep-bosomed goddesses who cup their breasts and stand on the heads of lions. When  Tiglath-Pileser III  took Damascus in 733/2, these heirlooms were part of the loot that fell eventually into Greek, probably  Euboean  hands. [9]