Henry  ʻ Ōpūkaha ʻ ia  (circa 1792–1818) was one of the first  native Hawaiians  to become a Christian, inspiring  American   Protestant  missionaries to come to the island during the 19th century. He is credited with starting Hawaii's conversion to Christianity. His name was usually spelled  Obookiah  during his lifetime. His name Henry is sometimes Hawaiianized as  Heneri .

`Ōpūkaha`ia was born at  Ka`ū  on the  island of Hawai`i  in 1792. At the age of 10, his family was murdered by Hawaiian warriors. [1]  In 1807, when Captain Caleb Britnall took him aboard the  Triumph , the teenage boy had his first English lessons en route to  New Haven, Connecticut , along with fellow Hawaiian  cabin boy  Thomas Hopu. As a student in the New Haven area, he was looked after in a succession of homes, and worked summers to help earn his keep. The future Reverend Edwin W. Dwight, a senior in  Yale College  at the time, met him in 1809, when he discovered`Ōpūkaha`ia sitting on the steps of the college. When `Ōpūkaha`ia lamented that "No one give me learning," Dwight agreed to help him find tutoring. [2]  `Ōpūkaha`ia took up residence with one of Dwight's relatives, Yale president  Timothy Dwight IV , a founder of the  American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions , who instructed him in Christian and secular subjects. [2]  He had studied  English grammar  and the usual curriculum in public schools by the time he converted to Christianity in 1815, during the  Second Great Awakening . [3]

He and other  Polynesians  and  Native Americans  requested training to spread  the Gospel  back home. This inspired the founding of the  Foreign Mission School  in 1816, administered from Boston by the  American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions  (ABCFM). It had broad support from the residents of  Cornwall, Connecticut , where it moved in 1817, and from donors elsewhere in Connecticut, Massachusetts and New York. During its ten years, about 100 students attended: "43 Native Americans, 13 Americans (white), and 20 Hawaiians, and other natives of the Pacific. including 2 Chinese". [4]

Even before this school opened, Edwin Dwight wrote in 1818, `Ōpūkaha`ia had begun "'reducing to system his own native tongue. As it was not a written language, but lay in its chaotic state, every thing was to be done. …he had made some progress towards completing a Grammar, a Dictionary, and a Spelling-book.'" [5]  None survives.  Samuel B. Ruggles , one of the First Company of missionaries to Hawaii and a fellow student of `Ōpūkaha`ia at Cornwall, mentions in an 1819 letter that his own grammar (which does survive) was "much assisted by one which `Ōpūkaha`ia attempted to form." Elisha Loomis, who was to be printer for the first mission, was inspired to join it by reading `Ōpūkaha`ia's memoirs, edited by Dwight in the year of his death from fever, over a year before the First Company set sail from  Boston .

`Ōpūkaha`ia planned to return to Hawaii himself to preach, but contracted  typhus  fever and died in 1818 in Cornwall at the age of 26.

In 1826 the Foreign Mission School was closed by a scandal – two interracial marriages were too much for Cornwall residents. But both the school and `Ōpūkaha`ia were a catalyst for the  Sandwich Island  Mission and for the first concentrated efforts to analyse the language.

In 1993, `Ōpūkaha`ia's family decided to return his body from his grave in Connecticut to Hawaii. [6]  On Aug. 15, 1993, his remains were laid in a vault facing the sea at  Kahikolu Church  near the town of  Napo ʻ opo ʻ o , Kona, on the Island of Hawaii. It was the third church established in Hawaii by missionaries inspired by Opukaha ʻ ia. Hawaii's churches observe the third Sunday in February as a day of commemoration in honor of its first Christian. A plaque at the Cornwall gravesite reads: "In July of 1993, the family of Henry Opukahaia took him home to Hawaii for interment at Kahikolu Congregational Church Cemetery, Napo'opo'o, Kona, Island of Hawaii. Henry's family expresses gratitude, appreciation and love to all who cared for and loved him throughout the past years. Ahahui O Opukahaia"

He nearly completed a  Hawaiian  dictionary, grammar, and spelling book, besides translating the  Book of Genesis  into Hawaiian. The  Memoirs of Henry Obookiah  were published in  New York City  in 1818 and have been republished by the Woman's Board of Missions for the Pacific Islands several times since the 1960s. They have recently republished the 195-year-old book with a new epilogue of how his body was returned to the Big Island of Hawaii, along with new photographs. [7]