Herbert Ludwig Rusche  (born May 6, 1952 in  Bad Neuenahr-Ahrweiler ,  Rhineland-Palatinate ) is a  German  politician and  LGBT  activist.

Rusche was born in  Bad Neuenahr . In his childhood, he lived in three different cities. After his schooling, he lived in  Kaiserslautern ,  Heidelberg ,  Berlin ,  Hamburg ,  Offenbach am Main  and  Frankfurt am Main . Rusche left the  Protestant Church  in 1970 and became a  Buddhist  in 1977. In 1977 he also opened the first  health food store  in Offenbach with a friend. In the 1990s he was self-employed with a telecommunication business. He encountered severe health issues and retired permanently disabled in 2004.

Rusche has been openly gay since 1970. He, with some other friends, founded the organisation  Homo Heidelbergensis  in 1972, the first gay group in Heidelberg. In 1973 Rusche became a member of the organisation  Homosexuelle Aktion Westberlin  (HAW). Later he worked in Frankfurt as an activist with  Anderes Ufer . He then became a member in  Aktionsgemeinschaft Unabhängiger Deutscher  in Offenbach/Frankfurt and also became a member of the  Green List Hessen  (GLH). In 1978 Rusche he was a GLH candidate for the parliamentof  Hesse , but lost with the GLH only getting 1.1% of the vote.

Later Rusche became a founding member of  Sonstige politische Vereinigung DIE GRÜNEN  and of the party  Die GRÜNEN . Rusche was  Landesgeschäftsführer  of the Greens in Hesse. In 1982 the party won 8.6% of the vote in Hesse and the party was in parliament in Hesse ( Hessischer Landtag ) for the first time. The Green party later also won in federal elections and became a member of the  Bundestag  for the first time. Rusche was a member of the Bundestag from 1985 to 1987.

During his time in Bundestag, Rusche, who is  openly   gay , [1]  worked for the equalizing of the  age of consent ,  AIDS  causes, and financial help for people with AIDS. He and  Petra Kelly  worked on the situation in  Tibet . After he left the Bundestag, Rusche has worked for different AIDS organisations and for  Homosexuelle Selbsthilfe . In 2001, Rusche left  The Greens  because of the party's political decision on  Kosovo . In 2003 he became a member of the new LGBT organisation  Wissenschaftlich-humanitäres Komitee  (whk) in Hesse. Since 2004 Rusche has been a delegate of  Buddhistische Gemeinschaft  within the  Deutsche Buddhistische Union  (DBU). He became one of the members of the "Rat" (board of directors) of the DBU in early 2008. On August 24, 2009 he joined the  Hesse  chapter of the  German Pirate Party .