Heritage Day  is a  South African   public holiday  celebrated on 24 September. On this day, South Africans across the spectrum are encouraged to celebrate their culture and the diversity of their beliefs and traditions, in the wider context of a nation that belongs to all its people.

In  KwaZulu-Natal , 24 September Heritage Day was known as Shaka Day, in commemoration of the  Zulu   King ,  Shaka . [1]  Shaka was the legendary Zulu King who played an important role in uniting disparate Zulu clans into a cohesive nation. Each year people gather at  King Shaka's grave  to honour him on this day. The Public Holidays Bill presented to the new democratic  Parliament of South Africa  in 1995 did not have 24 September included on the list of proposed  public holidays . As a result of this exclusion, the  Inkatha Freedom Party  (IFP), a South African political party with a large Zulu membership, objected to the bill. Parliament and the IFP reached a compromise and the day was given its present title and seen as a public holiday.

...when South Africans celebrate the diverse cultural heritage that makes up a " rainbow nation ". It is the day to celebrate the contribution of all South Africans to the building of South Africa ( sic )

South Africans celebrate Heritage Day by remembering the cultural heritage of the many cultures that make up the population of South Africa. Various events are staged throughout the country to commemorate this.

Former  Western Cape  Provincial Premier  Ebrahim Rasool  addressed the public at a Heritage Day celebration at the Gugulethu Heritage trail in 2007 in Gugulethu. In  Hout Bay , there is an army procession and a recreation of the battle fought there.

In 2005, a media campaign sought to "re-brand" the holiday as National Braai Day, [3]  in recognition of the South African culinary tradition of holding informal backyard barbecues, or  braais .

On 5 September 2007,  Archbishop   Desmond Tutu  celebrated his appointment as  patron  of South Africa's Braai (Barbecue) Day, [4]  affirming it to be a unifying force in a divided country (by donning an apron and tucking into a  boerewors  sausage). [5]  At the end of 2007 National Braai Day changed its name to Braai4Heritage and the initiative received the endorsement of South Africa's National Heritage Council (NHC). [ citation needed ]

Organiser  Jan Scannell  (known as " Jan Braai ") announced that the aim is not to have a mass braai, but with little ones, friends and family. Some have commented that this is a ploy to make people forget the history and the original meaning of why the day was created. [6]