It is not clear exactly where and when the  crossbow  originated, however it is believed to have been invented in  Europe  and  China  around 6th to 5th century BC. The current archaeological evidence points to the common usage of crossbows in China for military purposes during the  Warring States period  from at the very latest, the second half of the 4th century BC onwards.

The earliest evidence of crossbows ( Chinese :  弩 ;  pinyin :  nǔ ) in  ancient China  and neighboring peoples dates back to at least the 6th century BC. According to  Sir Joseph Needham  in his  Science and Civilisation in China , it is not possible to pinpoint exactly which of the East Asian peoples invented the crossbow. Linguistically, it derives from non-Chinese languages of China's then neighbors, who were often hired as marksmen mercenaries, while the first records and examples of representations as well as specimens are from China. However, there is unquestionable evidence that the crossbow was used for military purposes at least as far back as the  Warring States  period from the second half of the 4th century BC onwards. [1]

In terms of archaeological evidence, bronze crossbow bolts dating from as early as the mid-5th century BC have been found at a  Chu  burial site in Yutaishan,  Jiangling County ,  Hubei  Province. [2]  The earliest handheld crossbow stocks with a bronze trigger, dating from the 6th century BC, were found in Tombs 3 and 12 at  Qufu ,  Shandong , previously the capital of  Lu . [3] [4]  Other early finds of crossbows were discovered in Tomb 138 at Saobatang,  Hunan  Province and dated to the mid-4th century BC. [5] [6]  However, ammunition for crossbows could have apparently also been  shaped as spherical bullets .  Jing Fang  (78-37 BC), a  Western-Han  era Chinese mathematician and music theorist, discussed  astronomical topics  such as  solar  and  lunar eclipses . [7]  He wrote that the moon, shaped like a ball, produced no light, yet instead acted like a mirror in reflecting the light illuminated only by the sun, which he compared to the shape of a round crossbow  bullet . [7]

Repeating crossbows , first mentioned in the  Records of the Three Kingdoms , were discovered in 1986 in Tomb 47 at Qinjiazui, Hubei Province, and were dated to around the 4th century BC. [8]  The earliest Chinese documents mentioning a crossbow were texts from the 4th to 3rd centuries BC attributed to the followers of  Mozi . This source refers to the use of a giant crossbow  catapult  between the 6th and 5th centuries BC, corresponding to the late Spring and Autumn Period.  Sun Tzu 's influential book  The Art of War  (first appearance dated between 500 BC to 300 BC [9] ) refers to the characteristics and use of crossbows in chapters 5 and 12 respectively. [10]  One of the earliest reliable descriptions of this weapon in warfare is of an ambush which took place at the  Battle of Maling  in 341 BC. Crossbow remains have also been found amongst the soldiers of the  Terracotta Army  near the mausoleum of China's first emperor  Qin Shi Huang  (260-210 BC). [11]

The  repeating crossbow  and multiple bow arcuballista were both developed in China. [12]  When discussing the advantages and disadvantages of the nomadic  Xiongnu  and  Han dynasty  armies in a memorandum to the throne in 169 BC, official  Chao Cuo  deemed the crossbow and repeating crossbow of the Han armies superior to the Xiongnu bow, even though the latter were trained to shoot behind themselves while riding. [13]  According to one authority, the crossbow had become "nothing less than the standard weapon of the Han armies," by the second century BC. [14]

In  Vietnamese  historical legend, the ruler and general  Thục Phán  who ruled over the ancient kingdom of  Âu Lạc  from 257 to 207 BC is said to have owed his power to a magic crossbow, capable of shooting thousands of arrows at once.

Crossbows were given to the Chams by China with instruction in crossbows and mounted archery being given by a Chinese official in  1171 . [16] [17]  In  1177  the transfer of crossbow technology by the Chinese was used by the  Champa  in their invasion and sacking of  Angkor , the  Khmer Empire 's capital. [18] [19] [20]

According to the Chinese  Wujing Zongyao  military manuscript of 1044, the crossbow used  en masse  was the most effective weapon against northern nomadic cavalry charges. [21]  Elite crossbowmen were also valued as long-range  snipers  as was the case when the Liao Dynasty general Xiao Talin was picked off by a Song crossbowman at the Battle of Shanzhou in 1004. [21]  Crossbows were mass-produced in state armories with designs improving as time went on, such as the use of a mulberry wood stock and brass; a crossbow in 1068 could pierce a tree at 140 paces. [22]

Chinese  Chuangzi Nu  stationary windlass device with triple-bow arcuballista

Chinese  repeating crossbow  with pull lever and automatic reload magazine

Chinese  Lian Nu  (連弩), multiple shot crossbow without a visible nut or cocking aid

The earliest evidence for a form of the crossbow in Europe dates to the 5th century BC when the  gastraphetes , an ancient Greek crossbow type, appeared. The device was described by the Greek author  Heron of Alexandria  in his work  Belopoeica  ("On Catapult-making"), which draws on an earlier account of his famous compatriot engineer  Ctesibius  ( fl.  285–222 BC). Heron identifies the gastraphetes as the forerunner of the later  catapult , which places its invention some unknown time prior to 420 BC. [23]

The gastraphetes was a large artillery crossbow mounted on a heavy stock with a lower and upper section, the lower being the case fixed to the bow and the upper being the slider which had the same dimensions as the case. [24]  Meaning "belly-bow", [24]  it was called as such because the concave withdrawal rest at one end of the stock was placed against the stomach of the operator, which he could press to withdraw the slider before attaching a string to the trigger and loading the bolt; this could thus store more energy than regular  Greek bows . [25]  It was used in the  Siege of Motya  in 397 BC. This was a key  Carthaginian  stronghold in  Sicily , as described in the 1st century AD by  Heron of Alexandria  in his book  Belopoeica . [26]   Alexander the Great's  332 BC  siege of Tyre  provides reliable sources for the use of these weapons by the Greek besiegers. [27]

The efficiency of the gastraphetes was improved by introducing the  ballista . Its application in sieges and against rigid infantry formations featured more and more powerful projectiles, leading to technical improvements and larger ballistae. The smaller sniper version was often called  Scorpio . [28]  An example for the importance of ballistae in Hellenistic warfare is the  Helepolis , a siege tower employed by  Demetrius  during the  siege of Rhodes  in 305 BC. At each level of the moveable tower were several ballistae. The large ballistae at the bottom level were designed to destroy the  parapet  and clear it of any hostile troop concentrations while the small armorbreaking scorpios at the top level sniped at the besieged. This suppressive shooting would allow them to mount the wall with ladders more safely. [29]

The use of the modern crossbow in European warfare dates back to Roman times. According to R. Ernest Dupuy and Trevor N. Dupuy, in 36 BC a  Han empire  expedition into central Asia encountered and defeated a contingent of Roman legionaries. The Romans were suggested to have been part of  Antony 's campaign against  Parthia . Chinese victory was based on their crossbows, whose bolts and darts seem to "have penetrated Roman shields and armor." The theory is that the Chinese crossbow was transmitted to the Roman world through this encounter. [30]

The crossbow was particularly prominent in European warfare from the  battle of Hastings  (1066) until about 1525. [31]  In the armies of Europe, [32]  mounted and unmounted crossbowmen, often mixed with slingers, javeliners and archers, occupied a central position in battle formations. Usually they engaged the enemy in offensive skirmishes before an assault of mounted  knights . Crossbowmen were also valuable in counterattacks to protect their infantry. Crossbowmen were held in high esteem as professional soldiers, often commanding higher rates of pay than other foot soldiers. [33]  The rank of commanding officer of the crossbowmen corps was one of the highest positions in many medieval armies, including those of Spain, France, and Italy. Crossbowmen were held in such high regard in Spain that they were granted status on par with the knightly class. [31]  Along with  polearm  weapons made from farming equipment, the crossbow was also a weapon of choice for insurgent peasants such as the  Taborites .  Genoese crossbowmen  were famous mercenaries hired throughout medieval Europe, while the crossbow also played an important role in anti-personnel defense of ships. [34]  Mounted knights armed with lances proved ineffective against formations of  pikemen  combined with crossbowmen whose weapons could penetrate most knights' armor. The invention of pushlever and ratchet drawing mechanisms enabled the use of crossbows on horseback, leading to the development of new  cavalry tactics . Knights and mercenaries deployed in triangular formations, with the most heavily armored knights at the front. Some of these riders would carry small, powerful all-metal crossbows of their own. [ citation needed ]

The crossbow almost completely superseded hand bows in many European armies in the twelfth century for a number of reasons (England, where the longbow was more popular, being a rare exception). Although a  longbow  had greater range, and could achieve comparable accuracy and faster shooting rate than a wooden or composite crossbow, [ citation needed ]  the latter can be used effectively after a week of training, while a comparable single-shot skill with a longbow could take years of practice. Later crossbows (sometimes referred to as  arbalests ), utilizing all-steel prods, were able to achieve power close (and sometime superior) to longbows, but were more expensive to produce and slower to reload because they required the aid of mechanical devices such as the  cranequin  or  windlass  to draw back their extremely heavy bows. Usually these could only shoot two bolts per minute versus twelve or more with a skilled archer, often necessitating the use of a  pavise  to protect the operator from enemy fire. [35]  Crossbowmen among the Flemish citizens, in the army of  Richard Lionheart , and others, could have up to two servants, two crossbows and a pavise to protect the men. Then one of the servants had the task of reloading the weapons, while the second subordinate would carry and hold the pavise (the archer himself also wore protective armor). Such a three-man team could shoot eight shots per minute, compared to a single crossbowman's three shots per minute. The archer was the leader of the team, the one who owned the equipment, and the one who received payment for their services. [32]

The payment for a crossbow mercenary was higher than for a longbow mercenary, but the longbowman did not have to pay a team of assistants and his equipment was cheaper. Thus the crossbow team was twelve percent less efficient than the longbowman since three of the latter could be part of the army in place of one crossbow team. Furthermore, the prod and bow string of a composite crossbow were subject to damage in rain whereas the longbowman could simply unstring his bow to protect the string. French forces employing the composite crossbow were outmatched by English longbowmen at  Crécy  in 1346, at  Poitiers  in 1356 and at  Agincourt  in 1415. As a result, use of the crossbow declined sharply in France, [35]  and the French authorities made attempts to train longbowmen of their own. After the conclusion of the  Hundred Years' War , however, the French largely abandoned the use of the longbow, and consequently the military crossbow saw a resurgence in popularity. The crossbow continued to see use in French armies by both infantry and mounted troops until as late as 1520 when, as with elsewhere in continental Europe, the crossbow would be largely eclipsed by the handgun. Spanish forces in the New World would make extensive use of the crossbow, even after it had largely fallen out of use in Europe. Crossbowmen participated in  Hernán Cortés ' conquest of Mexico and accompanied  Francisco Pizarro  on his initial expedition to Peru, though by the time of the conquest of Peru in 1532-1523 he would have only a dozen such men remaining in his service. [31]

Crossbows were eventually replaced in warfare by  gunpowder  weapons, although early guns had slower rates of fire and much worse accuracy than contemporary crossbows. The  Battle of Cerignola  in 1503 was largely won by Spain through the use of matchlock firearms, marking the first time a major battle was won through the use of firearms. Later, similar competing tactics would feature  harquebusiers  or  musketeers  in formation with pikemen, pitted against cavalry firing  pistols  or  carbines . While the military crossbow had largely been supplanted by firearms on the battlefield by 1525, the sporting crossbow in various forms remained a popular hunting weapon in Europe until the eighteenth century. [36]  Up until the seventeenth century most beekeepers in Europe kept their hives spread across the woods and had to defend them against bears. Therefore, their guild was granted the right to bear arms and is commonly depicted carrying heavy crossbows. [ citation needed ]

A  bomb -throwing crossbow called the  Sauterelle  was used by the  French  and  British  armies on the  Western Front  during  World War I . It could throw an  F1 grenade  or  Mills bomb  110–140 m (120–150 yd). [37]

The  Saracens  called the crossbow  qaws Ferengi , or "Frankish bow", as the Crusaders used the crossbow against the Arab and Turkoman horsemen with remarkable success. The adapted crossbow was used by the Islamic armies in defence of their castles. Later footstrapped version become very popular among the Muslim armies in  Iberia . During the  Crusades , Europeans were exposed to Saracen  composite bows , made from layers of different material—often wood, horn and sinew—glued together and bound with animal tendon. These composite bows could be made smaller and handier than wooden self-bows while retaining the pull, and were adopted for crossbow prods across Europe. Crossbow prods could be more easily waterproofed than hand bows, which was essential in the humid European climate.

In Central Africa simple crossbows were used for hunting and as a scout weapon, previously thought to have been first introduced by the Portuguese. Until recently they were especially in use by different tribes of the pygmy-people, usually with poisoned and relatively small arrows. This silent technique of hunting in the tropical forest is quite similar to that of the South American indigenous hunting method with blow pipe and poisoned arrows. It makes sure not to startle up the prey, for example if a first shot goes astray. Since the small arrow is rarely deadly itself, the animal will drop from the trees after some time because of the poisoning. In the American South, the crossbow was used by the conquistadors for hunting and warfare when firearms or gunpowder were unavailable because of economic hardships or isolation. [34]  Light hunting crossbows were traditionally used by the Inuit in Northern America [ citation needed ] .

Crossbows are mostly used for  target shooting  in modern  archery . In some countries they are still used for  hunting , such as in most of states within the USA, parts of Asia, Europe, Australia and Africa. Crossbows with special projectiles are used in  whale  research to take  blubber   biopsy  samples without harming the whales or other marine big "game" . [38]

The crossbow is still used in modern times by various militaries, [39] [40] [41] [42]  tribal forces [43]  and in China even by the police forces. [44]  As their worldwide distribution is not restricted by regulations on arms, they are used as silent weapons and for their psychological effect, [45]  even reportedly using poisoned projectiles. [46]  Crossbows are used for  ambush  and anti-sniper [47]  operations or in conjunction with ropes to establish  zip-lines  in difficult terrain. [48]