Belgium  was heavily involved in the early development of rail transport. Belgium was the second country in  Europe , after  Great Britain , to open a railway and produce locomotives. The first line, between the cities of  Brussels  and  Mechelen  opened in 1835. Belgium was the first state in Europe to create a national rail network and the first to possess a nationalized railway system. [1]  The network expanded fast as Belgium  industrialised , and by the early 20th century was increasingly under state-control. The nationalized railways, under the umbrella organization  National Railway Company of Belgium  (NMBS/SNCB), retained their monopoly until  liberalization  in the 2000s.

Attempts to build railways in Belgium significantly predated the establishment of the first line. In 1829, the British-Belgian industrialist  John Cockerill  tried to obtain a concession from the  Dutch king   William I  to build a railway line from  Brussels  to  Antwerp , without success. Shortly after the independence of  Belgium  from the Netherlands after the  Belgian Revolution  of 1830, a debate opened on the desirability of establishing public railway lines using the steam locomotives recently developed in England, where the  first private railway  had been completed in 1825.

Following the  Belgian Revolution  of 1830, when Belgium split from the  Netherlands , Belgium became a key site of railway development. In 1831, a proposal to build a railway between Antwerp and  Cologne  (in neighbouring  Prussia ) which would link the industrializing  Ruhr  and  Meuse  valleys with the ports of the  Scheldt  was considered by the Chamber of Representatives but was eventually rejected. [2] [3]  In August 1831, however, the government launched a big scale survey of potential sites for railways which, it was hoped, would help to regenerate the Belgian economy. [4]  Particularly in  liberal  circles, it was felt that railways would not serve a purely economic function, but were also necessary part of forging Belgian national identity. [4]

Unlike the  United Kingdom , where early railways had been developed by the private sector, the state took the initiative in the development of railways in Belgium, partly out of the fear that large banks, like the  Société Générale de Belgique  could develop a  monopoly  in the industry. [4]  Considering that the railways would be a major economic resource and a full national network would be necessary, the Belgian government was unusual at the time for planning a national network in advance before any was built. [3]  In 1834, the Belgian government approved a plan to build a railway between  Mons , an industrial town at the heart of the  Sillon industriel , and the port of  Antwerp  via  Brussels  at a cost of 150 million  Belgian francs . [5] [4]  The first stretch of this railway, between northern Brussels and  Mechelen , was completed in 1835 and was the first steam passenger railway in  continental Europe . [5]  Another line between  Liège  and  Ostend  meant that the country had a full rail network planned nearly from the outset. [5]  By 1836, the line to Antwerp had been completed and by 1843 the two main lines (which formed a rough north-south/east-west cross) had been finished. [6]

Early Belgian railways were heavily influenced by British designs, and British technology and engineers were extremely important. The engineer  George Stephenson  travelled on the first train between Brussels-Mechelen in 1835, and his company provided the first three locomotives (based on the  Rocket design ) [a]  used on the line. [6]  The rapid expansion of the Belgian railways in the 1830s was one of the factors allowing Belgium to recover from an economic recession which it had experienced since the revolution and served as a major force in the Belgian  Industrial Revolution . [1]

Subsequent development of the rail network was also largely organized by the state rather than by private companies. Several lines were built by private companies, notably the  Namur  to Liège line built in 1851, but private railways were built on a twenty-year  lease  which would return them to the government after the period has lapsed. [6]  Many of the lines were operated by the  Belgian State Railways . Within ten years of its first railway, Belgium had more than 560 kilometres (350 mi) of railway lines, 80 stations, 143 locomotives and 25,000 pieces of  rolling stock . [4]  Belgium's first  telegraph line  was installed in 1846 along the Brussels-Antwerp railway. [7]  Unlike canals, which made internal trade much easier than international, the railways also pushed Belgian companies to export their goods abroad. [7]  The success of the railways both intensified Belgian industrialization and consolidated Antwerp's position as one of Europe's pre-eminent ports. [4]

The Belgian government resisted attempts by foreign companies to buy up railway assets in Belgium. In the winter of 1868, against a background of French threats to Belgium and Luxembourg under the rule of  Napoleon III , the French  Compagnie des chemins de fer de l'Est  attempted to buy up numerous railway lines situated in southern and eastern Belgium in the  provinces of Liège ,  Limburg  and  Luxembourg . [8]  The Belgian state, under  Leopold II , felt that the takeover presented a military and political threat and intervened to stop the sale in 1869. [8]  The decision outraged the French, and Napoleon III considered invasion, but the outbreak of the  Franco-Prussian War  in 1870, and his subsequent overthrow, prevented war. [9]

In 1870, the Belgian state owned 863 kilometres (536 mi) of rail lines, while the private enterprises owned 2,231 kilometres (1,386 mi). From 1870 to 1882, the railways were gradually  nationalised . In 1912, 5,000 kilometres (3,100 mi) were state property compared to 300 kilometres (190 mi) of private lines. Full nationalisation was considered at the time, but was not enacted until 1926 when the  National Railway Company of Belgium  (SNCB-NMBS) was started, replacing the earlier  Chemins de fer de l'État belge . [b]  By 1958 the network was fully state-owned. The SNCB-NMBS first introduced electrification on the 44 kilometres (27 mi)  Brussels North  to  Antwerp Central  line in May 1935.

During the  German occupation in World War II , the SNCB-NMBS was forced to participate in the  deportation of Belgian Jews  to camps in Eastern Europe as part of  The Holocaust .

In 2005, the NMBS/SNCB was split up into three parts, to facilitate future  liberalization  of railway freight and passenger services in agreement with European regulations. Several freight operators have since received access permissions for the Belgian network.

The first Belgian-built locomotive, named  Le Belge , was built under license by  John Cockerill & Cie.  (the foremost Belgian industrial manufacturing firm at the time) according to a design licensed by  Robert Stephenson & Co.  in 1835.  Le Belge  is considered the first locomotive produced in continental Europe. Led by firms such as Cockerill, Belgium became a major centre of locomotive design and manufacture before World War II.  Other companies  included the  Société Anglo-Franco-Belge , La Meuse and the  Ateliers de Tubize .

The SNCB-NMBS traditionally terms its locomotives  as classes or types .

Belgium has a long tradition of  tramways  as part of the public transport of its towns and cities. Today there are  seven tram systems  operating in the country. The  network in Brussels  is one of the ten largest in the world and the  seacoast line  is the world's longest tram line. Horse-drawn trams operated from 1869 and the first electric trams appeared in 1894.

Belgians also played a major part in exporting tram components abroad.  Baron Empain , a Belgian industrialist and major investor in railways, gained the nickname "Tramway King" for his company's work in Russia, France, China, Egypt and the Congo and is perhaps best known for his work on the  Paris Métro .