The  men's tournament in  ice hockey at the 2014 Winter Olympics  was held in  Sochi ,  Russia  between 12–23 February 2014. For the fifth consecutive Olympics, players from the  National Hockey League  participated. Twelve countries  qualified  for the tournament; nine of them did so automatically by virtue of their  ranking  by the  International Ice Hockey Federation , while the other three took part in a qualification tournament.

Canada  won the tournament, defeating  Sweden  3–0 in the gold medal match, and avenging their  1994  gold medal loss.  Finland  finished with the bronze medal, defeating the  USA  5–0, with captain  Teemu Selänne  awarded as the MVP of the tournament, scoring twice in the bronze-medal game. [1]

With the gold medal, Canada became the first men's team to successfully defend an Olympic title since the  Soviet Union  in  1988  and the first team to finish the tournament undefeated since  1984 . [2] [3]

Canada surrendered only three goals in six games, the fewest allowed by a gold medallist since  1928  when Canada shut out the opposition in a three-game tournament. Canada also scored only seventeen goals, the fewest by a gold medal-winning team in Olympic history, although  Great Britain  averaged fewer goals per game at the  1936 Winter Olympics  (nineteen goals in eight games).

Canada ,  Czech Republic ,  Finland ,  Norway ,  Russia ,  Slovakia ,  Sweden ,  Switzerland , and the  United States  qualified as the top nine teams in the  IIHF World Ranking  in 2012.  Austria ,  Latvia , and  Slovenia  qualified by winning the qualification tournament. [4]

The IIHF selected 14 referees and 14 linesmen to work the 2014 Winter Olympics. They were the following: [5]

In each group, teams will be ranked according to the following criteria: [6]

All times are local ( UTC+4 ).

Following the completion of the preliminary round, all teams were ranked 1D through 12D. To determine this ranking, the following criteria were used in the order presented: [6]

The four highest-ranked teams (1D–4D) received byes and were deemed the home team in the quarterfinals as they are seeded to advance, with the remaining eight teams (5D–12D) playing qualification playoff games as follows.

Teams seeded D1 to D4 are the home teams.

Following the quarterfinal games, the winning teams will be re-ranked F1 through F4, with the winner of 1D vs. E4 re-ranked as F1, the winner of 2D vs. E3 re-ranked as F2, the winner of 3D vs. E2 re-ranked as F3, and the winner of 4D vs. E1 re-ranked as F4. The losers of the quarterfinal round games will receive a final ranking of 5 through 8 based on their preliminary round ranking.

Canada won the game 3-0 with goals from  Jonathan Toews ,  Sidney Crosby , and  Chris Kunitz , [7]  each scoring their first goal of the tournament. [8]  Canada shut Sweden out with an overpowering defense limiting them to 24 shots, and Canada's goaltender  Carey Price  played well when needed. [9]  The Canadian team's executive director  Steve Yzerman  called the performance in Sochi the finest defensive effort ever for a Canadian team. [10]  Canada shut out its opponents in the semifinals and final and allowed only three goals in six games. It was also the first time since 1928 that a Canadian team won all its games. [8]

The win represented Canada's second consecutive men's gold in ice hockey, and the third time in four Olympics that Canada won both men's and women's gold in hockey. Canada had not won back-to-back men's golds since 1948 and 1952, and no nation had done it since the Soviet Union in 1984 and 1988. [8]

The game was a national phenomenon in Canada, with more than 15 million Canadians watching at least part of the game. [11]  Several provinces and cities relaxed their liquor laws to allow bars to open as early as 4 am. [12]

The final standings of the tournament according to the  IIHF : [13]

Rankings based upon points, and sorted by goals. [14]

Hat trick  scorers

Goalkeepers with 40% or more of their team's total minutes, ranked by save percentage. [15]

Shutout  posters

Source:  IIHF.com