The  Independent Television Authority  ( ITA ) is a defunct agency created by the  Television Act 1954  to supervise the creation of "Independent Television" ( ITV ), the first commercial  television network  in the  United Kingdom . The ITA was responsible for determining the location, constructing, building, and operating the transmission stations used by the ITV network, as well as determining the  franchise  areas and awarding the franchises for each regional commercial  broadcaster . The Authority began its operations on 4 August 1954, a mere four days after the Television Act received  Royal Assent , under the Chairmanship of Sir  Kenneth Clark . The Authority's first Director General,  Sir Robert Fraser  was appointed by Clark a month later on 14 September.

The physics of  VHF  broadcasting meant that a comparatively small number of  transmitters  could cover the majority of the population of Britain, if not the bulk of the area of the country. The ITA determined that the first three franchise areas would cover the  London  area, the  English Midlands , and the North of England (basically the  Lancashire / Yorkshire  belt of industrial cities from  Liverpool  to  Hull , with the surrounding countryside). All three franchise areas would be awarded on a divided weekday/weekend basis, and it was planned that the franchise holders for these areas would produce the great bulk of network programmes, while the companies given the smaller franchises would produce mainly local programmes for their area only.

The ITA awarded franchises to applicant companies, selecting between applicants on the basis of the financial soundness of the company, the proposals for the service to be offered, and often on connections between the applicant company and the area to be served.

Franchises were awarded initially between 1954 and 1961, with the new television stations usually beginning their broadcasting 1-2 years later. During September 1963 the ITA invited new applications for franchises to operate from July 1964 for three years or until the arrival of  ITV2 , whichever came first (in the event, "ITV2", the second commercial channel, did not begin until 1982, under the guise of  Channel 4 ), but in fact no changes were made to any franchise holders at that time, except for confirming the merger of the  South Wales and the West  franchise held by  TWW  and the  Wales West and North  franchise held by  WWN  following the financial collapse of WWN.

In January 1955 the ITA authorised the creation of  ITN  (Independent Television News), a company owned and operated by the ITV companies collectively, to provide a news service for the new network.

On 22 September 1955 the ITV service opened in the London area, where the ITA transmitter could reach a population of nearly 12 million. The first commercial on British television was for "Gibbs SR" toothpaste.

When WWN went on the air on 14 September 1962, the ITV Network was completed. However, due to the late commissioning of two of WWN's three transmitters, the company never received more than half the projected income and the company failed in January 1964; the two Welsh franchises were consequently merged, with TWW broadcasting to the whole of Wales.

The 1967 franchise review involved substantial changes:

The 1967 franchises were subsequently extended in stages to expire in 1976, then 1979, and finally to expire on 31 December 1981. See the entry for the  IBA  for details of the 1981 and 1991-2 franchise rounds.

The  Sound Broadcasting Act 1972  gave the ITA responsibility for organising commercial radio in the UK, and reconstituted the ITA as the  Independent Broadcasting Authority  (IBA) with effect from Wednesday 12 July 1972. The IBA was subsequently replaced by the  Independent Television Commission  (ITC) (and the  Radio Authority ) under the provisions of the  Broadcasting Act 1990 , which themselves were replaced by the Office of Communications ( Ofcom ) at the end of 2003.