Inspector Clouseau  is a 1968  United Artists  film. It was directed by  Bud Yorkin , written by  Frank Waldman  and  Tom Waldman  and stars  Alan Arkin  as  Inspector Clouseau . It was filmed by  Mirisch Films  at the  MGM-British Studios ,  Borehamwood  and in Europe.

Screenwriter Frank Waldman would later co-write  The Return of the Pink Panther ,  The Pink Panther Strikes Again ,  Revenge of the Pink Panther , and  Trail of the Pink Panther . Tom Waldman would co-write  Trail  with Frank.

The film was not directed by  Blake Edwards , did not have a score by  Henry Mancini  and the title role was not portrayed by  Peter Sellers . All three were involved at that time with the film  The Party .  The Mirisch Company  wanted to proceed with this film, so when Sellers and Edwards declined to participate, Mirisch decided to proceed without them. The film languished in obscurity and although it has been released to home video on VHS and DVD, was not included in 2004's  Pink Panther Collection  but was later added to the  Ultimate  collection released in 2008.

The film received mostly negative reviews and performed poorly at the box office. [ citation needed ]

An  organized crime  wave strikes across Europe. Suspecting a mole within  Scotland Yard , the  Prime Minister  brings Clouseau in to solve the case. Clouseau foils two assassination attempts but is subsequently kidnapped. The gang uses him to make masks of his face which they later use to commit a series of daring  bank robberies  across Switzerland. Eventually, Clouseau foils the plot and unmasks the traitor within the Yard.

In addition to the title role, Arkin also played the members of the gang whenever they were disguised as Clouseau, with the other actors' voices dubbed onto the soundtrack.

Following the two successful previous Pink Panther films, Blake Edwards and Peter Sellers vowed never to work together again. Producer  Walter Mirisch  was interested in a third Panther film, but Sellers repeatedly refused the role. Following Alan Arkin's success in  The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming , Mirisch asked Arkin if he would fill the role vacated by Sellers. Blake Edwards turned down the director's chores so Mirisch found  Bud Yorkin . Just prior to shooting, Sellers contacted Mirisch stating that only he could play the role and would, if he himself approved the script. Mirisch turned him down. [1]

The film was produced by Louis Rachmil as one of  Mirisch Films  United Kingdom's film company qualifying for  Eady Levy  funds. Location scenes for  Inspector Clouseau  were shot in Europe. [2]

The  animated  opening credits were created and designed by  DePatie-Freleng Enterprises  and animated by London-based TVC, using DePatie-Freleng`s character design of  The Inspector  from the series of short cartoons under that title. (DePatie Freleng also animated the  Pink Panther  cartoon shorts, as well as the opening credit sequences for most of the Edwards-Sellers Clouseau films.)

In the scene where Clouseau is being chased through the cemetery after falling in the plot and disrupting the funeral, you can see a sign on a cross in the lower right part of the screen for a few seconds. The sign reads "Reposite En Pace: Norman Lear, 1903-1962".  Norman Lear  — very much alive at the time of this production — was director Bud Yorkin's partner in  Tandem Productions  in the early '60s, and would collaborate with Yorkin for many years on television shows as  All in the Family  (1971) and  Sanford and Son  (1972).