Introversion Software Limited  is a British  video game developer  based in  Walton-on-Thames ,  England .

The company was founded in 2001 by three friends, Chris Delay, Mark Morris, and Thomas Arundel, who met as undergraduates at  Imperial College London . [1]  The company originally labelled itself 'the last of the bedroom  programmers ' due to the trio working out of their homes - they finally moved into an office when working on their fourth game,  Multiwinia . Their first released  game ,  Uplink , was programmed and designed almost exclusively by Chris, while Mark and Tom handled marketing, materials and the other 'business' elements. Their small initial investment enabled them to buy  CD-Rs  and  printer cartridges . Early copies of the game were handmade. The company was able to fully make back their investment within a few hours of accepting orders. A large community formed and the team, along with a new programmer Andy Bainbridge, started work on two new games.

Darwinia  was released to much critical acclaim and was eventually re-released via  Steam  on 14 July 2005 [2]  ( Uplink  has also since joined  Darwinia  on Steam, as of summer 2006). On 29 September 2006, Introversion Software launched its third game,  DEFCON . Shortly after, Introversion had measured their bandwidth in terabytes for the first time. Soon after the release of  DEFCON  Introversion began work on a fourth game called  Subversion . [3]  Their next game, however, was  Multiwinia , a multiplayer follow up to  Darwinia , and was released on 19 September 2008. Sales have so far failed to live up to the example set by  DEFCON , despite that the game was received well by the community and indie gamers alike [ who? ] .

Darwinia  and  Multiwinia  were eventually ported for the  Xbox 360 . This resulted in the eventual release of  Darwinia+ , which included both games, to the  Xbox Live Arcade  on 10 February 2010. [4]

Introversion has a relatively small, but dedicated, following.

After the release of  Multiwinia  in 2008, Introversion then announced the commencement of working on a game called  Subversion  in December of that year. [3]  This was followed by a series of blog-posts about the development of the game and its  procedurally generated  urban areas [5]  and more recently the game was demoed at the World of Love event in 2010. [6]  Eventually, in October 2011, after 3 years in development, Subversion was announced as delayed. [7]

Shortly after, their new game was announced as  Prison Architect  during the  Humble Indie Bundle  release of Introversion games and  tech demos  of Subversion material, along with a treasure hunt of information on the new game hidden within the tech demos. [8]

After a low-key launch, the critical and (relative) commercial success of  Uplink  flushed Introversion with success. A visit to  E3  2002 saw the team 'rinse £10k in a week on speedboats and fast cars', but regret soon set in as they watched their income steadily decline, since 'in the games industry, you make 75% of your total revenue for the product in the first 6 months'. [9]  By Christmas 2002, then-publisher,  Strategy First , had stopped paying royalties for  Uplink  (they would later file a  Consumer Proposal  AKA  Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing , but were then acquired by Silverstar Holdings in early 2005); even with the cash flow from direct sales, Introversion ran out of money in the middle of 2003. [9]  The company hovered on the edge of bankruptcy, with the team selling most of their worldly goods, as their second project and only hope for funds --  Darwinia  -- 'slipped relentlessly'. [9]

Darwinia  was eventually released in March 2005, but despite a strong opening weekend, sales soon slipped too low to sustain the company. Within six months, the developers were back on UK government benefits until November, when they contacted  Valve Corporation  'on a whim' [10]  to try to set up a  digital distribution  deal on their  Steam  platform. Valve responded enthusiastically and, following a 14 December 2005 online launch, digital sales (which exposed the game to a new, global audience) kept the company going through to the release of their third game,  DEFCON .

On 15 September 2006, the day  DEFCON  pre-orders were made available, Introversion spent their last £1500. Fortuitously, the game 'did much much better than [they] ever imagined' and funds for at least the forthcoming twelve months quickly rolled in to replace it. Seemingly financially secure, the company place their eventual success largely at Valve's feet: 'Steam has made Introversion a commercial success', Tom Arundel is quoted saying. [11]

By early 2010 the company was back in dire straits. After spending over a year porting  Darwinia+  to the  Xbox 360 , the game was not successful at launch. "It just really bombed. We missed the entire audience, I think," Director Mark Morris said. [12]  The launch was in fact so poor, the company was able to tell in the first 10 minutes that it would not make enough money to save the company. [12]  At this time the company was so deeply in debt that by continuing operation the Directors faced criminal prosecution under the  UK's insolvency law . [12]  "Tom (Arundel) spent a lot of time in those final days genuinely convinced that we were trading insolvently, probably trading insolvently, which is a criminal offense. So he was arguing that we needed to stop immediately, completely down tools, or there was a very real possibility that we would face prosecution." [12]

Slowly Introversion's fortunes changed again. In the Summer of 2010 the company was able to add Steam achievements to DEFCON which resulted in the game being prominently featured in a sale. [12]  Morris credits the $250,000 generated by the Steam promotion as saving the company. [13]  Later, Introversion's games were featured in a  Humble Indie Bundle  that launched in November 2011. This "Humble Introversion Bundle" sold 190,261 bundles and generated $779,026.33. Introversion then used the money for the ongoing development of their next game, entitled  Prison Architect . [14]

As of 26 September 2015,  Prison Architect  had grossed over $19 million in sales, and over 1.25 million units of the game had been sold. [15]  By the end of August 2016 when the final version '2.0' of Prison Architect was released, the number of individual players was given as two million.