Ivor Lott and Tony Broke  was a  British   strip  which originally appeared in the comic book  Cor!!  on 6 June 1970, [1]  before moving to  Buster  when the two comics merged in June 1974. The comic strip was in syndication until the final issue of "Buster" on 3 January 2000. [2]  The comic was originally drawn by  Reg Parlett  and later continued by artists like  Jim Crocker  and  Sid Burgon . [3]

The strips revolved around two boys who lived close to each other. Tony Broke (a pun on the English  slang  term 'stony broke', meaning to have no money at all) was the penniless hero of the stories, while Ivor Lott (which sounds like "I've a lot") - a spoiled, rich  snob  - was the villain. The format of the strips was usually the same; Tony would be enjoying himself with some simple, cheap toy or activity, and Ivor would show off with an incredibly expensive version of the toy, bullying his neighbour in the process. On other occasions Tony went up against Ivor's constant cheating at sports and games. In each strip, Tony would ultimately win out, by getting Ivor into trouble or by tricking him to break his own toy, for example. Or Ivor's over-extravagance in proving his superiority over Tony simply backfired, and Ivor was often punished by his father for this. A typical  storyline  had Tony playing with  paper planes  by himself, before Ivor appears with an expensive  remote control   model aircraft , shooting down Tony's planes. Tony would then paint a wall to  camouflage  it, making Ivor break his plane by flying it into the wall. On rare occasions Tony would be foiled by something beyond his power, such as having to cancel a  cricket  game on account of rain. Ivor then claims that is not an issue as he presents an expensive inflatable stadium. While it may have been useful for Tony and Ivor to continue playing, Ivor's lousy cricket skills cause the ball to fly through the roof, popping the stadium and resulting in him being chased by angry spectators. On a few, very rare, occasions, the strip would end with Tony being astonished at how much money Ivor was prepared to throw around: once, after spending vast amounts on a haircut, Ivor ended up literally having a single hair cut.

The final issue of  Buster  included a page showing the ultimate fates of many of the comic's characters. In the case of Ivor and Tony, their roles were switched: Tony became rich thanks to his parents winning the  National Lottery , while Ivor ended up broke after his father lost all his money investing in the  Buster  comic.

A similar strip appeared in the comic  Jackpot , but this time it features a pair of girls called  Milly O' Naire and Penny Less  (a play on the words ' millionaire ' and 'penniless'). When Jackpot and Buster merged in 1982, the two strips merged as well: Milly became Ivor's girlfriend, while Tony preferred the more down to earth Penny. The girls would often behave the same way as their male counterparts; Milly attended an exquisite  boarding school ; then she is in shock to see Penny also attending, only her diligent study has awarded her a scholarship to the same  private school .

In the 1990s, the adult comic  Viz  ran a strip lampooning  Ivor Lott and Tony Broke , which contained slightly more mature themes. For example, in one strip, the Ivor character boasts about the  breast implant  surgery that he has paid for his girlfriend to get.