Janet Marshall Stevenson  (February 4, 1913 – June 9, 2009) was an American writer, teacher and social activist from  Oregon  who wrote in the areas of  civil rights , the  women's movement , the  peace movement , the  environment  and the arts. She published works in several fiction and non-fiction genres, and was recognized with several awards. She wrote a biography of California Attorney General  Robert W. Kenny , who defended the  Hollywood Ten  before the  House Un-American Activities Committee ; she herself was placed on the  Hollywood blacklist  for her political beliefs and associations, along with her husband  Philip Stevenson .

Janet Atlantis Marshall [1]  was born on February 4, 1913 in  Chicago ,  Illinois  to John Carter, an investment banker, and Atlantis Octavia ( née  McClendon) Marshall. [2]

Marshall graduated from  Bryn Mawr College  in 1933 and received an  MFA  in theater arts from  Yale University  in 1937. [3]

Marshall married playwright and screenwriter  Philip Edward Stevenson  in New York City in 1939. They met while working for a  summer stock theatre  in  Surry, Maine . The Stevensons collaborated on several plays, including "Counterattack," which was produced on Broadway in 1944. It was later turned into a successful motion picture of the  same name . Janet and Philip had two sons, Joseph and Edward. The Stevensons were divorced in 1964 and Philip died while traveling in the  Soviet Union  in 1965. Janet Stevenson moved to  Astoria, Oregon  the same year.

Stevenson taught theater at the  University of Southern California  but was fired for her alleged ties to the  Communist Party . She taught at  Grambling College  in Louisiana from 1966 to 1967, and served as a lecturer at  Portland State University  in 1968.

She served as cultural arts editor of the  Chicago Weekly  while she was in Chicago in the 1970s.

Stevenson published articles in  American Heritage  and the  Atlantic Monthly  among other magazines. Her literary agent was  Barthold Fles .

Janet Stevenson lived  Clatsop County, Oregon  from 1965 until her death in 2009. She lived at various times in  Walluski ,  Hammond  and  Warrenton , and served two terms as the mayor of Hammond, beginning in 1986.

Stevenson married Benson Rotstein in 1965. In 1970, Rotstein's contract was not renewed by the  Astoria School Board  because of his involvement in the  peace movement  and his use of controversial materials in his classroom. He appealed to the  American Association of University Professors , but their decision was still pending when he died in a boating accident on the  Columbia River Bar  the same year.

Janet Stevenson served as president of the  Oregon Women's Political Caucus  for many years and helped found the North Coast chapter of the organization.

Stevenson wrote  The Slope  in 2009 about Clatsop County doctor  Bethenia Angelina Owens-Adair  to "rescue Bethenia from obscurity"; it was published privately for Portland State University's "Walk of the Heroines" celebration. [4]

Stevenson died in Warrenton on June 6, 2009. Her obituary describes her as "a lifelong campaigner for  human rights ,  social justice  and peace and a staunch advocate of equal rights for women."

Her papers include the manuscript for a book,  The Last Town in Oregon , about her years as mayor of Hammond. It was not to be opened until her death. [5]

In 1938, Janet Stevenson won a  John Golden Fellowship  in playwriting; her fellow recipient that year was  Tennessee Williams . She won a C.E.S. Wood Distinguished Writer Award from the  Oregon Book Awards  in 1990. In 1994, she was honored as an  Oregon Woman of Achievement . Her novel  Departure  was selected in 2005 by the  Oregon Cultural Heritage Commission  for "Literary Oregon, 100 Books, 1800 – 2000", an exhibition in celebration of the centennial of the  Oregon State Library . [6]  Her name is included in  Portland State University 's Walk of the Heroines. [7]