Johan Reinert Reierson  (April 17, 1810,  Vestre Moland ,  Aust-Agder  - September 6, 1864) was  Norwegian-American  writer, author and publisher as well as an early Texas pioneer and emigration activist.

Reierson had been sponsored in 1843 by a group of prospective emigrants and financiers to tour the United States and report settlement possibilities. He made his way to the  Republic of Texas . Reierson traveled to  Austin , where President  Sam Houston  encouraged him to bring Norwegian settlers to the republic and promised aid in the establishment of a colony.  [1]

In 1844, Reierson wrote and published a comprehensive book about America titled  Pathfinder for Norwegian Emigrants to the United North American States and Texas  (Norwegian:  Veiviser for norske emigranter til De forenede nordamerikanske stater og Texas ) a comprehensive book about America published in Norway. Reierson particularly advocated Texas as the most promising regions for settlement. [2]

Reierson decided to immigrate to Texas and establish a Norwegian colony in the republic. With a small group of Norwegians, including his own family, he returned in the spring of 1845. Before departing for America, he established a monthly magazine,  Norway and America  (Norwegian:  Norge og Amerika ) to report on the progress of the Norwegians in America to the people of Norway. When Reierson immigrated to Texas,  Elise Wærenskjold  assumed the editorship of the popular magazine until she herself immigrated to Texas during in 1847.  [3]

After the annexation of Texas in 1845, Reierson led his group of settlers into the state and established the first real Norwegian immigrant colony in Texas in  Henderson County . The colony, originally named Normandy, merged with nearby  Brownsboro . In 1850, Reierson established a second colony. Families from Brownsboro moved to these communities, which they named Four Mile Prairie in  Van Zandt County  and Prairieville in  Kaufman County . In 1848 the Texas legislature had formed Van Zandt and Kaufman counties out of Henderson County. His pro-American letters to Norwegian newspapers continued to mark him as a controversial figure in his homeland. [4] [5]

Reierson married Henrietta Christine Waldt (1818–1851) on August 5, 1836 in Prairieville, Texas. The couple had six sons and two daughters. He spent the remainder of his life as a farmer and member of the Prairieville community. When he died in Prairieville, he was still writing about Texas in publications in Norway. He was buried at Four Mile Prairie Norwegian Cemetery. [6]