Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe e.V.  ( JUH ;  German  for "St. John Accident Assistance"), commonly referred to as  Die Johanniter , is a  voluntary   humanitarian  organisation affiliated with the  Brandenburg Bailiwick of the Order of St John , the  German   Protestant  descendant of the  Knights Hospitaller . The organisation was founded in 1952 in  Hanover  under the leadership of  Rudolf Christoph Freiherr von Gersdorff . One of the main reasons for its creation was the rise in injuries and deaths from  road traffic accidents  (hence the word "accident" in its name). JUH participates in international aid efforts together with its sister organisations in other countries as part of the  Johanniter International  partnership; it also works with the German  Malteser Hilfsdienst , affiliated to the  Catholic   Sovereign Military Order of Malta . As of 2008 the organisation had 28,300 active volunteers and youth members and around 1,500,000 registered members. [1]

Among recent developments of JUH in Germany is the establishment of local and regional groups that provide  first responder  services on horseback (see  Mounted search and rescue ).

Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe in Germany is organised in nine state chapters which comprise more than 200 associations on district and local levels. It has about 12,000 full-time and part-time employees and is supported by roughly 1.5 million financial donors. The Brandenburg Bailiwick of the Order of St John has been certified as a recipient of donations by Deutsches Zentralinstitut für soziale Fragen (German Central Institute for Social Matters), a Berlin-based private organisation.  Civil servants  are another factor that contributes to JUH's economic success. More than 10,000 children and youths are engaged in the organisation's youth chapter  Johanniter-Jugend . This youth chapter is a member of the Evangelical youth consortium in Germany and also of the  European Movement  Germany.

From 2002 to 2013 retired General  Hans-Peter von Kirchbach  was president of Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe. Professor  Horst Wilms  is the federal chief physician.

Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe in  Austria  was founded on 21 June 1974 in Vienna, where it first conducted patient transport together with the  Austrian Red Cross  with a single van. Today JUH in Austria is member of the  Vier for Wien  ambulance association. Vienna's four largest ambulance services,Red Cross, Arbeiter-Samariter-Bund Austria, JUH and Malteser Hilfsdienst, have been cooperating for a few years now in the ambulance sector. JUH serves areas in Vienna,  Orth an der Donau ,  Tyrol  and  Carinthia . These regions have different focuses though. While JUH in Vienna is primarily tasked with  emergency medical service , the Johanniters in Tyrol are mainly employed with home nursing and patient transport. There is an acute nursing service  A.I.D  that is specific to Vienna.

The Brandenburg Bailiwick of the Order of St John has been active for more than 20 years in neighbouring Poland where it has established 21 social care points. In the course of the eastward expansion of the  European Union  in 2004, the relief organisation Joannici Dzieło Pomocy was founded, which became active on 31 August 2004. Together with the Polish Johanniter foundation (established 2003) it engages primarily in ambulance services, nursing and youth work. Since its foundation, Joannici Dzieło Pomocy has recorded a constant growth which is thought to continue due to high requests in  first aid  courses.

Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe has bound itself to Christian charity. As a work of the Order of St John it sees its challenge in the needs and dangers of the people. The central motivation is humanitarian aid.

The statutory tasks of JUH include

Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe e.V. is a registered charity association in accordance with German law. It is an association within  Diakonisches Werk  of the  Evangelical Church in Germany  and is an acknowledged voluntary relief organisation in accordance with article 26 the first  Geneva convention  of 12 August 1949.