The Jordan Meningitis Foundation is a  non-governmental   Nonprofit organization  which was established in 1995 in  Amman  -  Jordan .

The Jordan Meningitis Foundation is the brainchild of the painter  Sana Al Masri , who lost her 17-year-old daughter “Sarab” to  Meningitis . Her efforts, since then, along with volunteers, members, doctors, professionals and others, have been devoted to work towards the eradication of this disease.

by holding lectures and distributing free pamphlets about Meningitis in Jordan.

Vaccination is the only public health tool available to prevent the vast majority of HIB disease. There is no vaccine yet available against all strains of Meningitis. Research continues in many countries abroad to develop vaccines against the most common strains and to find better ways of controlling the disease. Over 40 countries have included HIB vaccines in their expanded programs of immunization. In October 1998, the JMF received a grant, generously provided by the Embassy of  Japan  in Jordan, to purchase  Hib vaccine . Through this grass-root grant, a first step was taken to establish a pilot project in East Amman with plans for expansion into a second rural area. The pilot project would protect approximately 10,000 children from the HIB disease.

Jordanian Meningitis Foundation supports research and studies which help in controlling the disease. [1]

The JMF rehabilitation center has helped disabled children from meningitis to be promising cases after being regarded hopeless cases under the supervision of specialized physiotherapist, and with the aid of specialized equipment (donation from the Japanese Embassy), thus improving mobility for children. [2]  The rehabilitation program is pursuant to 4 days a week which runs by a  pediatrician , a  physical therapist , a special needs assistant and a social worker.

JMF also runs monthly field trips to family homes, where by a physiotherapist, and the social worker, respectively, attend to physical therapy, and attend to health, sanitation, and general social and financial well being of the children and their surroundings.