Joseph Frank "Fritz" Wehner  (20 September 1895 – 18 September 1918) was an American fighter pilot and wingman to  Frank Luke .

Wehner was born in  Roxbury, Massachusetts  on 20 September 1895. Wehner's athletic achievements as captain of the Everett High School football team earned him a scholarship to the  Phillips Exeter Academy  in  Exeter, New Hampshire  in 1914. He was working for the  YMCA  in  Berlin, Germany  when war was declared. He enlisted in the Signal Corps during June 1917.

While receiving flight training, Wehner's German ancestry led to an investigation followed by an unsubstantiated arrest for suspicion of treason by the Secret Service. He was cleared and departed for England in February 1918. He was assigned to the  27th Aero Squadron  under Major Harold Hartney in July 1918.

Flying as wing man to the mercurial balloon-buster  Frank Luke , Wehner shot down one Fokker D.VII and five balloons in just three days of aerial combat during September 1918. [1]

Protecting Luke as he attacked a third balloon, Wehner's  SPAD XIII  was shot down by  Luftstreitkräfte  ace  Georg von Hantelmann  of Jasta 15 on 18 September 1918. Wehner, who fell behind enemy lines, was taken to a German hospital where he died a short time later from his injuries. His body was recovered and buried in an American cemetery in Europe after the war, but it was reinterred in his hometown of  Everett, Massachusetts  in 1921.

He was awarded the  Distinguished Service Cross  twice, the second time with Oak Leaf clusters during his brief career. [2]

Distinguished Service Cross (DSC)

The Distinguished Service Cross is presented to Joseph Frank Wehner, First Lieutenant (Air Service), U.S. Army, for extraordinary heroism in action near Rouvres, France, September 15, 1918. While on a mission First Lieutenant Wehner found an enemy patrol of eight machines attacking a single American observation machine. He immediately attacked, destroying one and forcing another down out of control, his own plane being badly damaged by enemy machine-gun fire. He managed to convey the American plane to safety. [3]

Distinguished Service Cross (DSC)  Oak Leaf Cluster  The Distinguished Service Cross is presented to Joseph Frank Wehner, First Lieutenant (Air Service), U.S. Army, for extraordinary heroism in action near Mangiennes and Reville, France, September 16, 1918. Amid terrific antiaircraft and ground machine-gun fire First Lieutenant Wehner descended, attacked, and destroyed two enemy balloons. One of these balloons was destroyed in flames after it had been hauled to the ground and was resting in its bed. [3]