J. P. Patches  (full name: Julius Pierpont Patches) was a  clown  portrayed by Seattle entertainer  Chris Wedes  (April 3, 1928 – July 22, 2012).

The  J.P. Patches Show  was one of the longer-running locally produced children's television programs in the United States, having appeared on  KIRO-TV  in  Seattle  from 1958 to 1981. [1] [2]  The show was live, unrehearsed  improv  with rarely more than two live actors on screen (Wedes and Bob Newman) but with frequent contributions from the  sound effects  man and off-camera crew. [3]

J.P. Patches hosted his show twice a day every weekday for 13 years (plus Saturdays), then for the next eight years did the morning show only, and finally for the last 2 years appeared on Saturday mornings only—for a total of over 10,000 hours of on-air time. The show premiered on April 5, 1958, as the second program ever broadcast by KIRO-TV, the first being a telecast of the explosion of  Ripple Rock  in  Seymour Narrows ,  British Columbia , Canada. The show was immensely popular in the  Puget Sound  area and southwestern British Columbia, with children as well as their parents, who enjoyed J.P.'s frequent use of  double entendre  and sly subversiveness. [4]  Two generations of viewers grew up as "Patches Pals", sharing the joyful zany antics of J.P. with their kids. At the peak of its run, the  Emmy -winning program had a viewership of over 100,000 in its local markets.

The J.P. Patches Show  competed with two other local children's shows,  Captain Puget  on  KOMO-TV , [5]  and  Wunda Wunda [6]  and  King's Klubhouse , both on  KING-TV . [7]   Captain Kangaroo ,  CBS 's own long-running children's show, saw its first half-hour preempted by KIRO-TV in favor of  J.P. Patches .

After the TV show stopped airing, Wedes continued to portray J.P. at many public and private events over the years [8]  despite suffering in later years from incurable (but in remission)  blood cancer . [9]   [10]  In particular J.P. spent many hours visiting sick children at  Seattle Children's  Hospital in  Laurelhurst , for which Wedes never asked to be paid. In 2011, citing poor health, Wedes announced that he expected his final public appearance to be September 17, 2011. [11]  On July 22, 2012, Chris Wedes died after a long battle with  multiple myeloma , a form of blood cancer. He was 84. [12]

J.P. was the "Mayor of the City Dump", where he lived in a shack, the inside of which was the appropriately rough but colorfully-furnished studio set (currently on display at Seattle's Fremont Museum). He welcomed frequent guests: Seattle boy scout and girl scout troops, various local and national celebrities, and his cast of supporting characters: Sturdley the Bookworm, Esmerelda (portrayed by a  Raggedy Ann  doll), Ketchikan the Animal Man (a sort of  Jack Hanna  character), Boris S. Wort (the "second meanest man in the world"), LeRoy Frump (a character obviously based on Art Carney's Ed Norton), Tikey Turkey (a rubber chicken), Grandpa Tick Tock (a grandfather clock with an elderly face where the pendulum would be), The Swami of Pastrami, Ggoorrsstt the Friendly Frpl (a one-eyed brown shag carpet), Miss Smith (a motorcycle riding delivery woman who told mostly awful jokes), Superclown (a JP like superhero), J.P.'s evil counterpart P. J. Scratches (per official site  I.M. Rags ), and J.P.'s girlfriend,  Gertrude . Virtually the entire supporting cast, male and female, human or non-human, was played by the versatile Bob Newman. [4]

The city dump where J.P. lived is thought to be the Montlake  Landfill , which was a real city dump from 1926 to 1966, but since 1972 has been athletic fields, a parking lot, and the  Union Bay Natural Area  of the  University of Washington  in the  University District . [13]

J.P. announced the birthdays of selected Patches Pals by "viewing" them on his "ICU2TV" set (a cardboard prop that created the appearance that J.P. was looking at you from inside your television). He predicted where a gift might be hidden in the child's house with amazing accuracy (with the never-mentioned assistance of a postcard from a parent). [4]  The sound effect used was the same, distinctive  ringtone  of Cramden's "presidential hotline"  telephone  in  Our Man Flint .

Broadcaster  Daryl Laub  created the J.P. Patches character in 1953 for  WTCN-TV  in  Minneapolis , but when he left WTCN in 1955 for  KSTP-TV , Chris Wedes (pronounced WEE-dus) [1]  took over the character from that point on. Wedes appeared on several WTCN programs. Besides J.P., his most notable character was Joe the Cook on WTCN's  Lunch with Casey . [4]  Wedes brought J.P. with him when he moved to Seattle in 1958 to become KIRO-TV's first floor director. [4]  In addition to the long-running TV show, J.P. Patches made frequent fundraising appearances for local charities. He was a common sight at  Children's Hospital , visiting sick kids and promoting the work of the hospital.

On August 17, 2008 a bronze statue of J.P. and Gertrude was unveiled on North 34th Street, about 250 feet east of the intersection with Fremont Avenue North, in the  Fremont  section of Seattle. [14]  The unveiling date was to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the  J.P. Patches  show. [15]  The statue is called  Late for the Interurban  by sculptor Kevin Pettelle [16]  and is approximately 250 feet east of  Waiting for the Interurban . The unveiling was attended by hundreds of Patches' Pals, including Washington Governor  Christine Gregoire , Congressman  Jim McDermott , King County Executive  Ron Sims , and several members of the county and city councils; both Chris Wedes (J. P. Patches) and Bob Newman (Gertrude) were present. The event was emceed by  Pat Cashman , and the keynote address was given by Wedes' 16-year-old granddaughter, Christina Frost. [17]