Juicio Final  (2000)  ( Spanish  for "Final Judgment") was a  professional wrestling   Pay-Per-View  (PPV) show event produced by  Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre  (CMLL) that took place on March 17, 2000 in  Arena México ,  Mexico City, Mexico . The show was produced with the tag line,  Homenaje a Dos Leyendas: El Santo y Salvador Lutteroth  ( Spanish  for "Homage to Two Legends:  El Santo  and  Salvador Lutteroth ") to honor and remember CMLL founder Salvador Lutteroth and El Santo, the most famous Mexican wrestler ever. [2]  The show featured six matches in total with the main event of the show being a  Lucha de Apuestas , mask vs. mask match between  Villano III  and  Atlantis  in a match that has been called "The biggest Apuesta match of the decade". [3]  The match was voted the 2000  Match of the Year  in the  Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards . [3]  The show featured four additional matches, including two  Six-man "Lucha Libre rules" tag team matches , a singles match and a 16-man  Torneo cibernetico  elimination match.

Since 1996 the Mexican  wrestling company   Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre  (Spanish for "World Wrestling Council"; CMLL) has held a show in March each year to commemorate the passing of CMLL founder  Salvador Lutteroth  who died in March 1987. [4]  For the first three years the show paid homage to Lutteroth himself, from 1999 through 2004 the show paid homage to Lutteroth and  El Santo , Mexico's most famous wrestler ever and from 2005 forward the show has paid homage to Lutteroth and a different  leyenda  ("Legend") each year, celebrating the career and accomplishments of past CMLL stars. Originally billed as  Homenaje a Salvador Lutteroth , it has been held under the  Homenaje a Dos Leyendas  ("Homage to two legends") since 1999 and is the only show outside of  CMLL's Anniversary shows  that CMLL has presented every year since its inception. All  Homenaje a Dos Leyendas  shows have been held in  Arena México  in  Mexico City, Mexico  which is CMLL's main venue, its "home". [5]  Traditionally CMLL holds their major events on Friday Nights, which means the  Homenaje a Dos Leyendas  shows replace their regularly scheduled  Super Viernes  show. [2]  The 2000 show was the fifth overall  Homenaje a Dos Leyendas  show. The show was also billed as  Jucio Final  ("Final Judgement"), an event name or tag line that CMLL has used intermittently since 1990. It was the third time since 1990 CMLL used the  Juicio Final  name for a show.

The event featured six  professional wrestling matches  with different wrestlers involved in pre-existing  scripted  feuds,  plots  and  storylines . Wrestlers were portrayed as either  heels  (referred to as  rudos  in Mexico, those that portray the "bad guys") or  faces  ( técnicos  in Mexico, the "good guy" characters) as they followed a series of tension-building events, which culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches.