The  Kamakura  jubango  (ten-game match) was a historically significant  go  match played in Japan in 1939, 1940 and 1941. It pitted  Kitani Minoru  and  Go Seigen , close rivals for a decade and friends at a personal level, and both ranked 7  dan , against each other.

Go Seigen emerged victorious by a 6-4 margin. This match marked the beginning of the period of his dominance as the top player, which continued until the  First Meijin Tournament  in 1962.

Nine months before the match started, Kitani had defeated  Honinbo Shusai , the  Meijin , in Shusai's retirement game. The Honinbo title was to be open to competition, and both Kitani and Go took part in that tournament. Each failed to get through to the final match, which was contested by  Sekiyama Riichi  and  Kato Shin , with Sekiyama becoming the first Honinbo under the  titleholder system  in 1941. The preliminaries of this first  Honinbo tournament  were under way during the Kamakura match. With wartime conditions, the pace of all competitions slowed considerably. All these players also took part in the  Oteai  competition. The first 9  dan  to emerge from the Oteai was  Fujisawa Kuranosuke , some years later (at this time 6  dan ). At the time, it was hard to receive promotion even to 8  dan . The pool of top players was rather small;  Karigane Junichi  was 8  dan  but had stayed outside the system that had established itself around Shusai and the Nihon Ki-in.

The result of the match was the first step in the process by which Go Seigen would establish ascendancy over his rivals (except Sekiyama, who withdrew from competition because of bad health). He was promoted to 8  dan  in spring 1942. Having taken on Kitani, against whom he had an unfinished  jubango  stopped at 3-3 in 1933 when Kitani was promoted, Go took on both Karigane and Fujisawa (whom he played in the end in three long matches), and then the new Honinbos  Hashimoto Utaro  and  Iwamoto Kaoru . Go Seigen played again in the Honinbo tournament, but not after 1945. In later years various challenges allowed him to face the Honinbo of the time.

Apart from game 2, played in  Shiba Park  in Tokyo, and game 5 played in  Gunma Prefecture , the match was held in various locations actually in  Kamakura . The first game was in the Buddhist temple  Kenchō-ji . Game 3 was in  Engaku-ji , as were games 4, 6 and 9. The games 7, 8 and 10 were in the  Hachiman  Shinto shrine in Kamakura.

The starting conditions of the match were  tagaisen ; since the players were of equal rank: colours alternated, with Kitani winning the  nigiri . There was no  komidashi . Largely unexpectedly, Kitani went 1-5 down over the first six games, and so was subject to  beating down . The final four games, beginning 29 December 1940, were therefore played at  sen-ai-sen , with Kitani taking Black twice, White, then Black. Of those final games, Go Seigen could win only the second, so that with a net score of 4-6 and a win with White Kitani had salvaged some of his reputation.

All ten games are masterpieces, with both players showing great spirit.

The match was sponsored by the  Yomiuri Shimbun .