A  karakul  (or  qaraqul )  hat  ( Pashto / Persian : قراقلی) is a hat made from the fur of the  Qaraqul  breed of  sheep , often from the fur of aborted lamb  foetuses . [1] [2] [3] [4]  The triangular hat is part of the costume of the native people of Kabul which has been worn by many generations of men in Afghanistan. The fur from which it is made is referred to as  Astrakhan ,  broadtail ,  qaraqulcha , or  Persian lamb . Qaraqul means black fur in  Turkic , similar types of hats are common among Turkic peoples. The hat is peaked, and folds flat when taken off of the wearer's head.

The qaraqul hat is typically worn by men in  Central  and  South Asia . The folding  qaraqul  was worn by the former  king of Afghanistan ,  Amanullah Khan  in 1919. The karakul, which had distinguished all educated urban men since the beginning of the 20th century, has fallen out of fashion in Afghanistan. [5] [6]

In the  USSR , the karakul hat became very popular among Politburo members. It became common that Soviet leaders appeared in public, wearing this type of hat. The hat probably gained its prestige among Party leaders because it was an obligatory parade attribute of the  czar  and Soviet generals. [ citation needed ]  By wearing the karakul hat, Soviet leaders wanted to underline their high political status. In the Soviet Union this hat also took the nickname the pie-hat [ citation needed ]  because it resembled traditional Russian pies.

A  Jinnah cap  is a fur qaraqul hat named after the founder of  Pakistan ,  Muhammad Ali Jinnah . The cap was worn by many of the early politicians of Pakistan, especially the founding party: the  Pakistan Muslim League . The Jinnah cap and  shalwar kameez  are the national dress of Pakistan. Many Pakistani politicians and heads of state including President  Ayub Khan  have worn the Jinnah cap.

It is also worn in  Nepal  by men mostly of  Indo-Aryan  descent. It is called  Dhaka topi  and is the national hat of Nepal. The Jinnah Cap is particularly popular amongst Islamic religious scholars and the elder generation of  Balochistan ,  Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa  and  Azad Kashmir .

The velvet version of the cap is called a  Rampuri cap , and was worn by the first Prime Minister of Pakistan Sahibzada  Liaqat Ali Khan .

In 1937, the 25th Annual Conference of the  All-India Muslim League  was held in Lucknow under the chairmanship of Quaid-e-Azam (The Great Leader),  Muhammad Ali Jinnah . An amalgamation of nearly seventy preeminent people were summoned at Butler Palace in Lucknow. What was to ensue after that day would prove to be a decisive moment in the course of history. Prior to attending this historic session,  Nawab Mohammad Ismail Khan  suggested that the day held an auspicious meaning within its clutches. It was a day when the Indian Muslim population earnestly embraced and hailed  Muhammad Ali Jinnah  as their foremost leader. Perceiving it to be apt;  Nawab M. Ismail Khan  took his Samoor Cap and generously offered it to  M. A. Jinnah , insisting that it would suit him well. The humbled gentleman graciously accepted Nawab Sahib's offer, to thereafter wear a traditional Sherwani/Achkan along with it. The outcome was visually pleasing as it greatly added to his personality. When the  Quaid  appeared on the dais in his rustic attire; the massive crowd, consisting of 50,000 people, burst into loud cheers upon feasting their hopes on the Great Leader. The brisk slogans of "Allah-ho-Akbar" (God, The Greatest) dominated the atmosphere and the clapping continued for a long time. Since that day,  Nawab Mohammad Ismail Khan's  Samoor Cap—rather unknown to the masses—was dubbed and came to be known as the iconic "Jinnah cap" all over  South Asia  and elsewhere in the world. Over the active years of the All-India Muslim League, before eventually Pakistan was consummated, Nawab Sahib's cap would be lent to  M. A. Jinnah  on several occasions.

Karakul caps have been worn by  Kashmiris  for the past several decades. [7]  The Karakul cap is colloquially known as a "Karakuli" in the Kashmir Valley. Although it is now associated with the Kashmiri gentry, it is not actually a native Kashmiri headgear. It seems to have been made popular by Muslim leaders in the Kashmir Valley during the freedom movement of the 1930s/40s and was pioneered by Sheikh Abdullah. The traditional headgear of the landed gentry in Kashmir has historically been the turban tied in a similar fashion to the Pashtun equivalent (but this has now disappeared) as seen in many old photographs. The peasants in  Kashmir  still wear the typical skull cap associated with Muslims world over.

A  turban  is now more of a symbol of honour in Kashmir. In most religious shrines of Kashmir, the priests wear turbans. [ citation needed ]

Some of the turbans have been of ordinary dyed  muslin  cloth mostly of  saffron  color with a dashing of green sometimes, where as some represent very exquisite and fashionable headgear. Most of the politicians in Kashmir have given up the use of a turban which used to be the symbol of dignity and honor, except for ceremonial use. The Karakul caps are the present rage amongst most of the mainstream politicians. It is quite common for a Kashmiri groom to remove the traditional turban and replace it with a Karakul Cap as he waits at his in-laws house for his bride to accompany him home. In the Kashmiri Muslim diaspora the Karakul cap is now only worn at important moments. [ citation needed ]

Karakul caps became popular among  Africans  and  African-Americans  in the 1960s. African Presidents such as  Modibo Keïta  of  Mali  and  Ahmed Sékou Touré  of  Guinea , who were themselves both of pre-colonial African royal descent, wore the karakul cap to show their independence from  European  colonial power. The karakul cap is often worn by African and  African-American   Christians  and  Jews .

Both the velvet and faux fur versions are worn by men of African descent with Western  suits , and African attire such as the  grand boubou .  Muslims  of African ancestry wear these caps with the  dishdasha . In urban slang, the karakul cap is called a  fur  kufi , while the Rampuri cap is called a  velvet  fez hat . When worn properly, these caps are always slanted at an angle, and never placed straight on the head.  Leopard  print karakul caps are common in  Africa , but are rarely seen in the United States. In popular culture,  Eddie Murphy  wore the karakul cap in the movie  Coming to America .