Kim Delaney  (born November 29, 1961) is an American actress known for her starring role as Detective  Diane Russell  on the  ABC  drama television series  NYPD Blue , for which she has won an  Emmy Award . [1] [2] [3]  Early in her career, she played the role of  Jenny Gardner  in the ABC daytime television drama  All My Children . [4]  She later had leading roles in the TV dramas  Philly  and  CSI: Miami  and on the  Lifetime  television drama  Army Wives .

Delaney, an  Irish American , was born on November 29, 1961, in  Philadelphia ,  Pennsylvania , the daughter of Joan and Jack Delaney. [5]  Delaney's mother was a  homemaker  and her father a  union  official and former head of the  United Auto Workers . [6] [7]  She was raised  Roman Catholic . [7]  Delaney grew up in  Roxborough  and has four brothers: Ed, John, Keith, and Patrick. While she was attending  J. W. Hallahan Catholic Girls High School , [8]  she worked as a model for the  Elite  agency. After her graduation, she went to New York and found employment there as a model. At the same time, she studied acting with  William Esper .

Delaney first became known for her stint as innocent teenager  Jenny Gardner Nelson  on the  soap opera   All My Children , which also was her first job. [4]  She played the character from August 1981 to August 1984, earning a  Daytime Emmy Award  nomination, as well as a loyal fan base; a profile of the actress a decade later noted, "Delaney left the soap in 1984, but fans still remember her as Jenny. 'They come up and will say they've followed everything I've done, and they stopped watching the show after I left, and they're so happy to see me on  NYPD Blue , because they love the character.'" [4]

After leaving the show, Delaney began acting in  feature films . In 1985, she appeared with  Emilio Estevez  in  That Was Then... This Is Now , a film version of the  S. E. Hinton   novel of the same name . In 1986, she played a young  nun  in the military action movie  The Delta Force , starring  Chuck Norris . In 1987, Delaney was cast as Amanda Jones in  Some Kind of Wonderful  opposite  Peter Gallagher , but new director  Howard Deutch  recast both roles with  Lea Thompson  and  Craig Sheffer  before filming. Also in 1987, she appeared both as Jessie in  Christmas Comes to Willow Creek , and as associate attorney Leslie Kleinberg during the 2nd season of  L.A. Law . In 1988, Delaney starred in the thriller  The Drifter . In 1994, she appeared in the film  The Force .

In 1988, Delaney became a regular on the  CBS  television series  Tour of Duty . After leaving the show in 1989 to give birth to her and husband Joseph Cortese's son, her character was killed in an explosion just as her  All My Children  character had died five years earlier. In the years immediately following her departure from her two early television series, her film and TV roles tended to be few and of low quality, in the opinion of both the critics and the actress herself. A 1996 profile article in  Entertainment Weekly , on the occasion of her landing a prestigious television role at the end of this period, noted: "Delaney's  résumé  is spotted with ridiculous roles that range from a nun in the  Chuck Norris   action movie ,  The Delta Force , to a possessed  nymphomaniac  in the  soft-core   horror film ,  Temptress . 'There's a lot of things I did to pay the mortgage,' Delaney says resignedly." [9]  Roles from this period include her 1992 appearance as  Lucky Santangelo  in the television  miniseries ,  Lady Boss .

In 1995, Delaney began portraying the role of  NYPD Blue  Detective Diane Russell. Originally slated for only four episodes, the role became permanent after her character's relationship with Detective  Bobby Simone  ( Jimmy Smits ) became a hit with viewers. [9]  In this role, she won her first  Emmy Award [10]  as Best Supporting Actress in a Drama and was also nominated for two other Emmy Awards. After Smits left  NYPD Blue , producer  Steven Bochco  chose Delaney for the lead in the new television series  Philly . Despite critical acclaim, the show lasted only one season.

CBS then courted Delaney to take on the female lead on its new drama television series  CSI: Miami , a spin-off of sorts from the hit  CSI: Crime Scene Investigation . [11]  She was written off the series during the first season after just ten episodes;  Entertainment Weekly  suggested that it had been due to a lack of chemistry between Delaney and star  David Caruso . [12]

After briefly returning in 4 episodes of  NYPD Blue , Delaney starred in the 2004 NBC miniseries  10.5 , and its 2006 sequel,  10.5: Apocalypse . The following year, she began a recurring role on  The O.C.  In 2006, Delaney starred with  Steven Weber  in an episode of  Nightmares and Dreamscapes: From the Stories of Stephen King  titled " You Know They Got a Hell of a Band ," about  Rock and Roll   Heaven . Delaney next appeared twice on  Law & Order: Special Victims Unit  in early 2007, guest-starring on the episodes " Philadelphia " and " Florida ."

Delaney played the main role of  Claudia Joy Holden  on the  Lifetime Television  series  Army Wives . In November 2012, it was announced that Delaney would not be returning for the show's seventh season, as her character was killed off. [13]

Delaney will play  Mary Todd Lincoln  in the upcoming miniseries  To Appomattox . [14]

Delaney has been married twice. Her first marriage to actor  Charles Grant  lasted from 1984 to 1988. Her second marriage was to actor  Joseph Cortese . They married in 1989 and divorced in 1994. Delaney and Cortese had a son named Jack who was born in 1990. She was engaged to producer Alan Barnette from 1997 to 2006. She has dogs named Penny (a Dachshund) and Sydney (a half-Corgi mix).

In 2002, Delaney was arrested in  Malibu ,  California , for suspicion of  drunk driving  after she refused to take a  breathalyzer  test. [15]  She subsequently pleaded  no contest  and was sentenced to two-years  probation , fined, and ordered to take a  defensive driving  course. [12]  As of June, 2016, Delaney has not been arrested for any further DUI's. [ citation needed ]

Delaney was selected as a speaker at the presentation of the  National Constitution Center's   Liberty Medal  to  Robert Gates  in 2011. After delivering a rambling and disjointed speech in which she discussed being a member of a military family, she was escorted off stage. The slurred delivery and often incomprehensible speech fueled reports that she was under the influence of  alcohol  or other  drugs  at the time of the speech. [16]