Kohala  is a town in  Pakistan  on the  River Jhelum , north of  Murree , south of  Muzaffarabad , and east of  Circle Bakote . The town was at the  independence  of  Pakistan  in 1947 a border town between newly created Pakistan and the princely state of  Jammu and Kashmir , but is today only the border between the rest of Pakistan and  Azad Kashmir . [1]

Kohala is the site of the well-known  Kohala Bridge  across the Jhelum. Kohala is a gateway to the  Muzaffarabad  and  Bagh  districts of  Azad Kashmir . It lies where the  Punjab , Kashmir and  Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  boundaries meet. [2]

There are two theories regarding the etymology of Kohala. One is that it originates from the name of a Hindu goddess  Kohala Devi  because Kohala was a place where Hindu deities were worshipped on the banks of the Watesta (Jhelum) River before the arrival of Islam. A temple called Dawal was there.

Another theory is that Kohala is derived from the  Dhondi/Kareali language   kohal , meaning "cattle room" or house that was divided in living room in ancient time or separate or beneath of living house in modern era, or  gotrerhi , a place where livestock stay and sit.

Kohala is a place where caravans from Kashmir stayed after crossing Jhelum River and their horses and donkeys were tied there in antiquity. There are two Kohalas in the region; one is on both banks of river Jhelum and a Kohala Bala at  Lora , a union council of  Abbottabad District .

In ancient times Kohala was a centre of Hindu pilgrimage who worshipped Kohala Dewi. By the middle of 500 BCE Kohala had become a centre of the Buddhist community and a temple was constructed between Kohala and Knair Pull. It was a route of Buddhist monks for travelling from  Taxila  to Sharda Buddhist university in Sharda, Kashmir.

Kohala was possessed by the  Karlal  tribe in the mid eighteenth century and in 1200 when the  Dhond Abbasi  tribe attacked, they vacated  Bakot  and Kohala also. From this time Kohala was under the proprietorship of  Birote . When the Mojwal family of the Dhond Abbasi tribe migrated to Bakote by force, the Kohala proprietorship transferred to  Mojwals  of Bakote.

In the first decade of 1800, Malka Singh, administrator of  Rawalpindi  captured Kohala by force. In 1814 Malka Singh and the  Dogra  government of Kashmir under  Gulab Singh  developed the area as a business centre for  Hindu  merchants.

In 1863 Sir  James Abbott , the first commissioner of  Hazara , changed the name of the area from Patan (the old name) to Kohala.

The British government transferred the administration of Kohala to  Murree  on a one hundred-year lease in 1873. The Punjab government renewed this lease in 1973 for 20 years and it was reunited with Bakote in 1993.

The government of  British India  built a rest house in the south of Kohala for high officials with seven drying rooms, two kitchens, one reading room, two toilets and horse and dog barns. The Indian olive, banana, apple and silkworm trees were in the guest house's eastern lawn. Guest house staff consisted of 30 people. A  telegraph  office (later a post office) was established there in 1880.  Allama Iqbal  (Poet of the East) staying in this rest house in 1930 and wrote his famous poem "Hammala", the 1st poem of his book Bang-e-Dra here. The bazaar of Kohala was most populated until 1947. Hindu merchants from Dewal,  Murree , Rawalpindi and Punch controlled trade between  Punjab  and Kashmir.

In 1947 during the  independence  of  Pakistan  Kohala joined Pakistan.