Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender  ( LGBT ) people in  Kerala  face legal and social difficulties not experienced by non-LGBT persons. However, Kerala has been at the forefront of LGBT issue, along with its neighbour  Tamil Nadu . [1]  Whilst lesbians, gays and bisexual remain marginalised due to laws in India, transgender people have secured legal rights in India. Kerala became one of the first States in India to follow this up with a welfare policy for the transgender community and in 2016, introduced free Sex Reassignment Surgery (SRS) through government hospitals. [2] [ citation needed ]

As a part of its Transgender Policy, the government introduced 'Gender Taxi' along the lines of 'She Taxi' which will be owned and operated by transgender people. [3]

Queer pride rallies also played a vital role in changing the mindset of Kerala's society. The last pride march were conducted in August 11 2016 at Kozhikode.

Homosexual intercourse was made a criminal offence under  Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code , 1860. This made it an offence for a person to voluntarily have "carnal intercourse against the order of nature." In 2009, the Delhi High Court decision in  Naz Foundation v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi  found Section 377 and other legal prohibitions against private, adult, consensual, and non-commercial same-sex conduct to be in direct violation of fundamental rights provided by the Indian Constitution.

According to a ruling by the Indian Supreme Court, decisions of a High Court on the constitutionality of a law apply throughout India, and not just to the territory of the state over which the High Court in question has jurisdiction. [ clarification needed ] [4]  However, even there have been incidents of harassment of homosexual groups. [5]

On 23 February 2012, the  Ministry of Home Affairs  expressed its opposition to the decriminalisation of homosexual activity, stating that in India, homosexuality is seen as being immoral. [6]  The Central Government reversed its stand on 28 February 2012, asserting that there was no legal error in decriminalising homosexual activity. This resulted in two judges of the Supreme Court reprimanding the central government for frequently changing its stand on the issue. "Don't make a mockery of the system and don't waste the court's time," an apex court judge told the government. [7]

On 11 December 2013, the Supreme Court set aside the 2009 Delhi High Court order decriminalising consensual homosexual activity within its jurisdiction. [8] [9] [10]  The bench of justices  G. S. Singhvi  and  S. J. Mukhopadhaya  however noted that parliament should debate and decide on the matter. [11]

On January 28, 2014  Supreme Court  dismissed the review Petition filed by  Central Government , NGO  Naz Foundation  and several others, against its December 11 verdict on Section 377 of IPC. [12]  In explaining the ruling the bench said: "While reading down Section 377, the High Court overlooked that a minuscule fraction of the country’s population constitutes lesbians, gays, bisexuals or transgender people, and in the more than 150 years past, less than 200 persons have been prosecuted for committing offence under Section 377, and this cannot be made a sound basis for declaring that Section ultra vires Articles 14, 15 and 21." [13]

On December 18 2015,  Shashi Tharoor , a member of the  Indian National Congress  party, introduced the bill for the decriminalisation of  Section 377 , but the bill was rejected by the house by a vote of 71-24. However, Shashi Tahoor is planning to re-introduce the bill. [14]

Human rights groups [ which? ]  expressed concerns that this would render homosexual couples vulnerable to police harassment, saying: "The Supreme Court's ruling is a disappointing setback to human dignity, and the basic rights to privacy and non-discrimination" [15]  The  Naz Foundation (India) Trust  stated that it would file a petition for review of the court's decision. [16]

On February 2 2016, the Supreme Court decided to review criminalisation of homosexual activity. [17]  In 2016, Kerala mooted free sex-reassignment surgeries in Government hospitals after it introduced the first State government policy on transgenders. [18] [19]

Same-sex marriages are not legal in India. However, in the recent times, movements demanding the same has been vociferous in Kerala.

After the 2014 Indian Supreme Court decision to recognize "Third Gender", affirming the transgender community's freedom from discrimination and right to equality, the state of Kerala was the first to introduce their transgender policy, in 2015. The policy addresses the right for people belonging to transgender communities to identify as male, female or TG (Third Gender). It has provisions to protect the community by providing equal access to social and economic resources, protecting the right to equal treatment under the law, the right to life, liberty and justice, and the right to non-discrimination based on sex.  [20]   [21]

Kerala has been at the forefront of Transgender rights movement in India and was one of the first to introduce welfare policy for the group in 2015. In 2016, the State government followed this up with introduction of free Sex Reassignment Surgery (SRS) in government hospitals and budgetary allocation for the same. Kannur, a Northern District, in 2016 allocated a part of its budget towards the employment and skill training programs for transgenders in Kerala. It is also one of the few states with vocal transgender community that has staged numerous 'pride parades' in the past decade.

Thiruvanathapuram MP, Shashi Tharoor, is one of the strong proponents of LGBT rights and introduced a private member's bill twice in the Lok Sabha for repulsion of Section 377 that criminalises sexual activity 'against the order of the nature'. Section 377 is allegedly widely misused by the police to harass LGBT community members.

In 2016, President Pranab Mukherjee also opened a 'Gender Park' in Kozhikode aimed at researching for policy with regards to the LGBT community and its empowerment. The State Government has mooted several pilot initiatives to empower the group through this mechanism and is one of the first of its kind in India.

Kerala has also empowered the transgender community with voting rights and strong social awareness and protection programs. It's also stood strongly against the discrimination of Transgenders in educational campuses.

In 2016, the first transgender school opened in the city of Kochi, Kerala. The school prepares students for the 10th and 12th standard board exams, as well as, provides vocational skills training. The school welcomed 10 transgender students ranging from ages 25-50. Transgender activist Vijayraja Mallika, who is the head of the school, states “the school aims at making transgenders eligible for taking decent jobs and living a dignified life.” She further states, “we have admitted six candidates so far, all male-to-female persons, from 14 applicants. Of the 10 seats, we have reserved one for female-to-male and one for the disabled.” The teachers of the school are also transgender. The school generally opens more opportunities for the community to gain an occupation and an education.  [22]

Transgender models have been introduced in Kerala. The clothing brand Red Lotus hired two transgenders to model their sarees, Maya Menon and Gowri Savithri. This gained a lot of attention by going viral on social media. This line is part of the Sharmila Nair’s collection ‘Mazhavil’ or rainbow, representing the rainbow colours associated with LGBT rights, and is dedicated to trasnsgenders.  [23]

In 2017, a workshop was held at Kozhikode, a city in Kerala, to address the implementation of the state’s transgender policy within social institutions. It was organized by the Social Justice Department, and around 30 representatives of the transgender community attended. During the workshop, they discussed proposals such as having identity cards for transgender people, developing a pension plan for those within the community who are over 60, implementation of skill development training programs, having scholarships and educational loans for transgender students, and provide driving lessons in order for transgender people to be employed as Uber drivers.  [24]

The Government Medical College Hospital in Kottayam, a town in Kerala, will open a clinic that exclusively attends to the transgender community. The clinic will have a panel of doctors who are specialized in the area. This is the first government clinic of its kind, and will focus on serving the transgender community, as well as open its doors to sex workers. The clinic is to run twice a month. The proposal for the clinic was put forward by the District Legal Services Authority (DLSA) after a recent camp for transgenders had voiced health concerns for the community. [25]  Kochi Metro is the first government agency in the country to employ transgenders; 23 will be on duty on inaugural day.