In  biochemistry , the  Lineweaver–Burk plot  (or  double reciprocal plot ) is a graphical representation of the Lineweaver–Burk equation of  enzyme kinetics , described by  Hans Lineweaver  and  Dean Burk  in 1934. [1]

The plot provides a useful graphical method for analysis of the  Michaelis–Menten  equation:

Taking the reciprocal gives

where  V  is the reaction velocity (the  reaction rate ),  K m  is the  Michaelis–Menten constant ,  V max  is the maximum reaction velocity, and [ S ] is the substrate  concentration .

The Lineweaver–Burk plot was widely used to determine important terms in enzyme kinetics, such as  K m  and  V max , before the wide availability of powerful computers and  non-linear regression  software. The  y -intercept  of such a graph is equivalent to the inverse of  V max ; the  x -intercept  of the graph represents −1/ K m . It also gives a quick, visual impression of the different forms of  enzyme inhibition .

The double reciprocal plot distorts the error structure of the data, and it is therefore unreliable for the determination of enzyme kinetic parameters. Although it is still used for representation of kinetic data, [2]  non-linear regression or alternative linear forms of the  Michaelis–Menten  equation such as the  Hanes-Woolf plot  or  Eadie–Hofstee plot  are generally used for the calculation of parameters. [3]

When used for determining the type of enzyme inhibition, the Lineweaver–Burk plot can distinguish  competitive ,  non-competitive  and  uncompetitive  inhibitors. Competitive inhibitors have the same  y -intercept as uninhibited enzyme (since  V max  is unaffected by competitive inhibitors the inverse of  V max  also doesn't change) but there are different slopes and  x -intercepts between the two data sets. Non-competitive inhibition produces plots with the same  x -intercept as uninhibited enzyme ( K m  is unaffected) but different slopes and  y -intercepts. Uncompetitive inhibition causes different intercepts on both the  y - and  x -axes .

The Lineweaver–Burk plot is classically used in older texts, but is prone to error, as the  y -axis takes the reciprocal of the rate of reaction – in turn increasing any small errors in measurement. Also, most points on the plot are found far to the right of the  y -axis (due to limiting solubility) not allowing for large values of [S] and hence no small values for 1/[S]), calling for a large extrapolation back to obtain  x - and  y -intercepts. [4]