The  Lua people  ( IPA:  [luaʔ] ) are a minority ethnic group native to  Laos , although there is now a sizable community living in  Thailand .  Lua'  is their preferred  autonym  (self-designation), while their  Lao  neighbours tend to call them  Thin ,  T'in  or  Htin  ( Lao :  ຖິ່ນ ,  Lao pronunciation:  [tʰin] ). Another term for this group is  Lawa [3]  (but they have to be distinguished from the unrelated  Lawa people  in northern Thailand). There are two subgroups: the  Mal  and the  Phai  or  Pray . [1]

The Lua speak  Mal  and  Phai , closely related, but not mutually intelligible languages, belonging to the  Khmuic  branch of the  Austroasiatic languages . Their home region is in the provinces of  Sainyabuli  (Hongsa and Phiang districts) and  Bokeo  ( Pak Tha District ). [4]  In Thailand, most Lua settle in  Nan province , close to the border with Laos. [2]

The Lua's traditional beliefs are characterised by  animism  and  shamanism . Some Lua, influenced by their Lao and Thai neighbours, have adopted  Theravada Buddhism , while a few have converted to  Christianity , but without renouncing their original ethnic beliefs. The Lua believe that the natural surroundings are full of good and evil spirits. They worship their respective villages' local spirits. The most highly respected genie called  bhuka  is celebrated for three days during  Lao New Year   (Songkran) . In order to win the spirits' blessings for a good harvest, a newlywed couple, help in cases of natural disasters or diseases etc., the Lua try to appease them with offerings of pigs, poultry, rice or liquor. Traditional Lua villages display a "spirit gate" to protect them from all evils coming from the outside world. To mediate between the living and the spirit world, each village choses a male shaman, called  khawcam . [5]

There is some academic debate whether the Lua have alreadly settled in their present home area since the 1st millennium AD (like the  Khmu ) or migrated there from northern  Vietnam  in a later period. More certainly, the Lua of Thailand have only arrived there in the late-19th or early-20th century. Some scholars however, believe that the Lua were the original inhabitants of Thailand's  Nan Province , before moving to Laos and later re-migrating to their original homeland. [4]

Following the communist victory in the  Laotian Civil War  (that was in the same period as the  Vietnam War ), many Lua families escaped Laos to seek refuge in the  Luang Prabang Range  area of  Nan Province  across the border in  Thailand . There was a large concentration of Lua refugees at  Ban Vinai Refugee Camp  in Thailand. In the early 1970s and 1980s, Lua families relocated to the United States. Today, there is a large Lua community in the state of California, expanding from Santa Rosa, Fresno, Modesto, Stockton, Sacramento, and other parts of the state of California, and also including the states of Minnesota, Tennessee, Washington, Iowa, and Illinois. Families who remained in the camps in Thailand resettled in Sainyabuli and neighboring provinces in the mid-1980s and early 1990s, where the Lua people had been originally displaced due to the wars in Southeast Asia.

Tai 
 Isan  (Northeastern Thai)  ·   Khorat Thai   ·   Khün   ·   Lao   ·   Lao Ga   ·   Lao Krang   ·   Lao Lom   ·   Lao Loum   ·   Lao Ngaew   ·   Lao Song   ·   Lao Ti   ·   Lao Wiang   ·   Tai Lu   ·   Northern Thai (Tai Yuan)   ·   Nyong   ·   Phu Thai   ·   Phuan   ·   Tai Yai    ·   Southern Thai   ·   Tai Bueng   ·   Tai Daeng  (Red Tai)  ·   Tai Dam  (Black Tai)  ·   Tai Gapong   ·   Kaleun   ·   Tai Nüa   ·   Tai Wang   ·   Thai  (Central Thai)

Rau 
 Saek   ·   Nyaw   ·   Yoy

Malayo-Polynesian 
 Cham   ·   Filipino   ·   Malay   ·   Moken   ·   Moklen   ·   Urak Lawoi’

Other  Austroasiatic 
 Bru   ·   Chong   ·   Kensiu   ·   Khmer  ( Northern )  ·   Kintaq   ·   Kuy   ·   Mani  ( Negrito )  ·   Mon   ·   Nyah Kur  (Chao-bon)  ·   Nyeu   ·   Pear   ·   Sa'och   ·   So   ·   Vietnamese

Khmuic 
 Khmu   ·   Lua   ·   Mlabri   ·   Phai   ·   Pray   ·   Tin

Palaungic 
 Blang   ·   Lamet   ·   Lawa   ·   Mok   ·   Palaung  (De'ang)

Tibeto-Burman 
 Akha   ·   Bamar   ·   Bisu   ·   Karen   ·   Kayah (Red Karen)   ·   Lahu   ·   Lisu   ·   Lolo  (Yi)  ·   Mpi   ·   Pa'O   ·   Phrae Pwo   ·   Phunoi   ·   Pwo   ·   S'gaw   ·   Ugong

Chinese 
 Thai Chinese  ( Teochew   ·   Hakka   ·   Hainanese   ·   Cantonese   ·   Hokkien   ·   Chin Haw   ·   Phuket Baba )

Hmong–Mien 
 Hmong   ·   Yao / Iu Mien

Other 
 Australians   ·   Burmese    ·   Farang  (Caucasians)  ·   Indians   ·   Iranians   ·   Japanese   ·   Koreans   ·   Nepalis   ·   Pakistanis