Luovi Halling  (August 7, 1867 – March 22, 1928) was a  United States Navy  sailor and a recipient of the United States military's highest decoration, the  Medal of Honor , for attempting to rescue a shipmate from drowning during a storm.

A native of  Stockholm ,  Sweden , Halling joined the Navy from the state of  New York . [1]  He participated in the first major engagement of the  Spanish–American War , the 1898  Battle of Manila Bay , as a  seaman  aboard the  USS  Boston . [2]  He later reached the rank of  boatswain's mate   first class  and served on the battleship  USS  Missouri  (BB-11) [1]

On the night of September 14, 1904, the  Missouri  was finishing up three weeks of target practice off the coast of  Martha's Vineyard ,  Massachusetts , when a storm struck. In the early morning hours of September 15, with the storm still raging, the ship's anchor began to drag. A detachment of thirty sailors went to the  forecastle  to haul it in so that the  Missouri  could move to a safer location. As they were doing this, a large wave crashed over the deck, scattering the men and washing one youthful sailor, Ordinary Seaman Cecil C. Young, overboard. Halling and another man, Boatswain's Mate First Class  Alexander Peters , jumped into the stormy water and swam towards Young. Wearing  oilskins  and heavy boots, Young sank beneath the waves and drowned before Halling and Peters could reach him. Due to the adverse weather, it was only with "utmost difficulty" that the two boatswain's mates were brought back onto the  Missouri . For their attempt, both Halling and Peters were awarded the Medal of Honor weeks later, on October 4. [3]

Halling's official Medal of Honor citation reads:

Serving on board the U.S.S.  Missouri , for heroism in attempting to rescue from drowning Cecil C. Young, ordinary seaman, 15 September 1904. [1]

Halling left the navy while still a boatswain's mate first class. He died at age 60 and was buried at Saint Michael's Cemetery in  East Elmhurst, New York . [4]