Macbeth  is an opera in three acts, with music by  Ernest Bloch  to a libretto by  Edmond Fleg , after the  eponymous play  of  William Shakespeare . Bloch composed the opera between 1904 and 1906, but it did not receive its first performance until 30 November 1910 by the  Opéra-Comique  in Paris with  Henri Albers  in the title role and conducted by  François Ruhlmann . Alex Cohen has written of quarrels within the cast that contributed to the opera's poorly received premiere.

After the premiere, the opera was performed 15 times through January 1911, but then was withdrawn. [1]   Romain Rolland  had studied the score and communicated his admiration to Bloch in June 1911. [2]

Guido Gatti has compared elements of Bloch's opera to the music of  Modest Mussorgsky . [3]  He has also written of the different treatments of the Macbeth story by  Giuseppe Verdi  and Bloch in their respective operas on the subject, with Verdi being more "realistic" and Bloch being more in keeping with the symbolist era in art at his time. [4]

After the premiere production, the opera was staged in 1938 in Naples, but was then banned on orders of the Fascist government. Subsequently, the opera was produced in Rome in 1953, and in Trieste. [5]

The opera was staged, in English, at the  Juilliard School  of Music in New York under the direction of  John Houseman , in May 1973.  Peter Herman Adler  conducted and the singers included L. Carlson, H. Barnsley, R. Termine, F. Burchinal, M. Li-Paz and W. White. [6]

The  University College Opera  of University College, London, performed the English language premiere of  Macbeth  in the UK in March 2009. [7]

The US premiere by a professional opera company was given by the  Long Beach Opera  in June 2013 in a production by  Andreas Mitisek  with Benjamin Makino conducting. [8]  That same production was staged by the  Chicago Opera Theater  in September 2014 with Francesco Milioto conducting. [9]

The opera was staged, in the original French, at the  Manhattan School of Music  in December 2014 under the direction of Dona D. Vaughn with Laurent Pillot conducting. [10]

The story is essentially that of the  Shakespeare  play, with the five acts compressed to three. The opera contains seven  tableaux , with the prelude comprising the first tableau, and each of the three acts containing two tableaux.

Complete recordings conducted by Alexander Rumpf and Friedemann Layer have been produced. [12]

A full recording of a performance in 1997 was issued in 1999 (Musicales Actes Sud OMA34100) with  Jean-Philippe Lafont , Markella Hatziano, Jean-Philippe Marlière, Jacque Trussel, Christer Bladin, Philippe Georges, Marcel Vanaud, Sophie Fournier, Hanna Schaer, Ariane Stamboulides, Wojtek Smilek, Annie Varville, Franck Bard, Ferijs Millers, Andris Gailis; with the  Orchestre Philharmonique de Montpellier Languedoc-Roussillon ; Choeur de la Radio lettone;  Friedemann Layer , conductor [12]

A recording exists with  Heinz Rehfuss  as Macbeth and Lucienne Devallier as Lady Macbeth, with  Ernest Ansermet  conducting the  Orchestre de la Suisse Romande . [13]