Revolt of 1837 
 Mexican-American War

American Civil War

Manuel Antonio Chaves  or  Chávez  (October 18, 1818? – January, 1889), known as  El Leoncito  (the little lion), was a soldier in the  Mexican Army  and then became a rancher who lived in  New Mexico . His life was full of incident, and his courage and marksmanship became literally legendary in his own time. In documented history, as an  American  soldier he helped win the  American Civil War   Battle of Glorieta Pass  and was in command during an important fight in the  Navajo Wars . As a  Mexican  soldier he probably negotiated the surrender of a large part of the  Texan Santa Fe Expedition .

Chaves, a lineal descendent of one of the Spanish conquistadores led by Don  Juan de Oñate , was born in the village of Atrisco, just west of  Alburquerque , then part of the  Spanish Empire . At the age of about sixteen, he participated in a trading expedition or slave-taking raid to the  Navajo  country. His party of approximately fifty ran into a ceremonial gathering of thousands of Navajos, probably at  Canyon de Chelly , and was overwhelmed. Chaves, severely wounded by arrows and the only survivor, made his way home alone and without provisions, a journey of almost 200 miles.

The historian Marc Simmons speculates that Chaves's first formal military experience may have been in August, 1837, under the command of his cousin  Manuel Armijo , who put down an  uprising  in  Santa Fe  and made himself governor of New Mexico, by then a province of an independent Mexico. At any rate, in 1839 Chaves was commissioned as a sublieutenant ( alférez ) in the rural mounted militia. In 1841, he probably [1]  negotiated the surrender of about half of the  Texas Santa Fe Expedition . According to Twitchell (1909), Chaves received the cross of honor from the Mexican government for that service.

When the United States invaded in 1846, Chaves again went to fight for Armijo as a  militia  officer, but Armijo's surrender ended the  Battle of Santa Fe  before it began. In 1847 Chaves (after having spent some time in jail on suspicion of helping an abortive uprising in Santa Fe) swore an oath of allegiance to the United States. He declined a commission as an officer and enlisted as a private in the U.S. force that put down the  Taos Revolt . At the  Siege of Pueblo de Taos  he saved his captain,  Ceran St. Vrain , by clubbing with his rifle a Pueblo with whom St. Vrain was struggling. [2]

Chaves spent the following decade as a rancher, businessman (trading with  Indians  among others), and Indian fighter. In 1860 he became a lieutenant-colonel in a militia unit, the Second New Mexico Mounted Volunteers, that had just been formed to fight the Navajos and  Apaches . The following year, when he was commander of Fort Fauntleroy (later  Fort Wingate ) and an armistice had been made with the Navajos, allegations of cheating in a horse race led to a fight between his men and visiting Navajos in which a number of Navajos were killed. This event was crucial in the resumption of hostilities that led to the forced  Long Walk of the Navajo  in 1863 (Dunlay 2000).  Kit Carson  arrested Chaves after the fight, but with the circumstances of the killings unclear and the Civil War underway, Colonel  Edward Canby  suspended the house arrest after two months.

In 1862 General  Henry Sibley  led a force of  Texans  in an attempt to capture New Mexico for the  Confederacy . Chaves, who had declared for the Union, fought with his militia at the Union defeat at  Valverde . Then at the  Battle of Glorieta Pass , Canby and Major  John Chivington  chose Chaves to guide Chivington's force to the Confederate supply train. The regular Union soldiers and New Mexico militia destroyed the supplies, which forced the Confederates to retreat to Texas. Although official military records barely mentioned Chaves ( Union Army Operations  1960, cited in Simmons 1973), other contemporary accounts described his actions (Whitford 1906, Hays n.d., cited in Simmons).

Chaves was honorably discharged in 1863 (after the dismissal of allegations that he had sold Army wagons for his profit). In that year he engaged in what he later called his greatest fight. A group of Navajos were raiding the  Rio Grande  valley near  Socorro , killing many people and driving off herds of cattle, horses, and sheep. They took captive a son of Matías Contreras, a prominent local citizen. As Contreras would not wait for troops from  Fort Craig , Chaves led some 15 civilians on muleback against over 100 Navajos. The Navajos attacked Chaves's group at a spring called Ojo de la Mónica, immediately killing all the mules with rifle shots and forcing their pursuers to take cover. As Chaves was the best marksman, he fired his own rifle and also some of the others' while they reloaded his. By nightfall, only Chaves, Contreras, and one other man remained alive. At dawn they found that the Navajos had retreated, not knowing that Chaves had only three bullets left. (Contreras ransomed his son some months later.)

In 1863, the Long Walk ended the Indian wars in most of New Mexico. Chaves spent the rest of his life ranching in the San Mateo Mountains, building his home within a hundred feet of oak trees where he had rested in his flight from Canyon de Chelly as a teenager. Immediately behind those trees he built a family chapel, where he was buried along with his wife and children.

Chaves appears as a minor character in  Death Comes for the Archbishop  by  Willa Cather , who consulted with Chaves's son Amado. Chaves is depicted as a friend of Archbishop "Latour" ( Jean Baptiste Lamy ). However, the only interaction between Chaves and Lamy known to history is that, probably during the late 1850s, Lamy  excommunicated  Chaves during a dispute over the property line between a chapel and Chaves's house in Santa Fe. Chaves, his half-brother Román Baca, and a servant brought loaded rifles to the next Mass, and the priest did not read the order of excommunication.