Marienmünster  is a town in  Höxter  district in  North Rhine-Westphalia ,  Germany .

Marienmünster is North Rhine-Westphalia's smallest municipality by land area. It lies in the  Weserbergland , in the state's easternmost district, about 15 km north of  Brakel .

Clockwise from the north, Marienmünster's neighbours are:

Marienmünster consists of the following centres:

Marienmünster-Vörden's bioclimate and the surrounding area's displays a number of factors of varying intensity that make it quite agreeable and restful, giving the area the proper preconditions for using the climate in therapy. This goes for all times of year other than the winter months, when cold, dry weather takes hold under the influence of  Continental  systems, and the Weserbergland,  Teutoburg Forest  and  Eggegebirge  have their heights covered in snow.

The town of Marienmünster was formed on 1 January 1970 by merging the until then independent municipalities of Bredenborn, Vörden (both towns), Altenbergen, Born, Bremerberg, Eilversen, Großenbreden, Hohehaus, Kleinenbreden, Kollerbeck mit Langenkamp, Löwendorf mit Saumer, Münsterbrock mit Abtei, Oldenburg and Papenhöfen mit Bönekenberg. The town's administrative centre is in Vörden.

Between the Oldenburg and Vörden, the  Münsterholze , the Hungerberg and Löwendorf lay until the first half of the 16th century a town named Wendedhen (1188), Winethe (1203), Winethen (1240), Wenethen (1241), Wenden (1430). The  monks  from Marienmünster earned their  tithes  from this town.

According to the registers of the  Corvey  Monastery, the town was mentioned as early as 980 under the name "Wynithun". In the 16th century, the three villages of Großenbreden (Wendenbreden 1541, Wendelbreden 1650, Großenwendelbreden 1793), Kleinenbreden (Lütkenbreden 1650, Lükewendelbreden 1793) and Papenhöfen (earlier die Höfe zu Wenden 1545) developed. The farming community of Bönekenberg, belonging to Papenhöfen, was described as a settlement beginning in 1430. Settlement was established in the 16th century on the site of the failed village of Mechtestorpe (1138) or Mestorp (1339), where in the 9th and 10th centuries, the Corvey Monastery already had holdings.

Hohehaus's history can be traced back to the earlier village of Dungen, which was named as early as 825 or thereabouts in the Corvey Traditions, the monastery's donation registers. The Corvey Monastery received at that time several donations and owned a main farm of 22  Hufen  here. Besides Corvey, the Marienmünster Abbey must have been working holdings here quite early on, too, since in 1339, Abbot Hermann von Mengersen surrendered half his earnings from the place to the Counts, the Lord of Everstein and his son Otto, to protect and defend the Abbey's holdings for six years. In 1360, evidence shows that the Corvey estates along with the  ecclesiastical fief , passed into Count Hermann von Pyrmont's hands. He in turn passed them as a direct fief to the von Kanne family.

There arose in the 16th century between the Count of  Pyrmont  and the Corvey Monastery a boundary dispute that on 15 June 1535 was arbitrated to the effect that Dungen passed to the von Kanne family. In 1595, Dungen was still called a village. In a document from 1602, a new placename crops up, rendered  "Dungen, itzo dat Hagehauß" , archaic German for "Dungen, the house in the forest". Later, this was shortened to "Hagehaus", and by 1660, the current form "Hohehaus" had arisen.

Town council's 22 seats are apportioned as follows, in accordance with municipal elections held on 26 September 2004:

Note: The last two named are citizens' coalitions.

Marienmünster's civic  coat of arms  might heraldically be described thus: In argent an abbey gules with two side towers gules with pointed roofs sable and between these and behind the abbey a tower gules with cupola sable, on the abbey wall between the side towers an eight-pointed star Or.

The abbey in the arms is a stylized representation of the west façade of the Marienmünster abbey church established by Count Widukind III of Schwalenberg in 1128. Its meaning in relation to the town is therefore quite visible even today as a unifying symbol of town, people and church. The star is from the Schwalenberg family's arms.

This coat of arms was conferred on 25 July 1973. [2]

The town's  flag  is striped red and white lengthwise with the coat of arms in the middle.

The town of Marienmünster has a well-developed  tourism  industry. The community of Vörden was dubbed "State-recognized climatic spa" in 1999.

In Marienmünster are three  primary schools  and a  Hauptschule . Students who go to  Realschulen  and  Gymnasien  are driven by bus to nearby towns such as  Bad Driburg ,  Höxter ,  Steinheim  and  Brakel .

The schools in Marienmünster are:

Furthermore, the town of Marienmünster, together with the town of Höxter, runs the Höxter-Marienmünster  Volkshochschule . Marienmünster also has two municipal  kindergartens , and in Bredenborn a church kindergarten.