The YMCA Camp  Menogyn  is a wilderness youth camp located off the  Gunflint Trail  near  Grand Marais, Minnesota

The mission of  YMCA  Camp Menogyn is to provide transformational experiences for young people age 12-18 through the practice of wilderness travel and the emphasis of the four core values of respect, honesty, caring, and responsibility. More information is available at  Menogyn

YMCA camp Menogyn is situated on  West Bearskin Lake , in the Arrowhead region of Northeastern  Minnesota . Camp literature states that the word Menogyn is derived from the native language of the  Ojibway  people, and in translation, means "to grow more fully." Founded in 1922, Menogyn is administered by the Camping Services of the  YMCA  of Minneapolis, along with camps Icaghowan, Ihduhapi, and Warren.

Menogyn is located on the border of the  Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness  (BWCAW). Menogyn is not accessible by automobile, and nearly all visitors reach camp by crossing  West Bearskin Lake . Menogyn's physical location and facilities are used almost exclusively as a base camp where small groups are outfitted for their wilderness trip, logistics are arranged, and groups are welcomed upon their return. Exceptions include programming during the off season (September through May), when Menogyn is often used as a base camp for day trips and shorter overnight trips in the surrounding wilderness. In addition, Menogyn offers introduction to winter wilderness weekends, which include  dog sledding ,  cross-country skiing , and  snowshoeing .

Menogyn staff lead groups, usually of four to six campers, on wilderness canoeing, backpacking, and rock climbing trips. Combination trips are also offered. Canoe sessions of 8 to 15 days visit the  Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness , while 8- to 14-day backpacking sessions utilize the nearby  Superior Hiking Trail  and  Isle Royale National Park . Rock climbing sessions climb at sites at  Tettegouche State Park , on the  Superior Hiking Trail , and within the  Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness .

In order to provide young people with ongoing and appropriate levels of challenge in their wilderness experiences, Menogyn offers a series of invitation-only trips. Youth who exemplify the YMCA core values of respect, honesty, caring, and responsibility are invited on these trips upon the recommendation of their counselors. These trips range from 21-day sessions (canoeing in  Quetico Provincial Park  of  Ontario , as well as backpacking in  Yellowstone National Park  and in the  Rocky Mountains ), to Nor'Wester sessions of 30–31 days.

Nor'Wester sessions take their name from the French-Canadian  voyageurs  of the late 18th and 19th centuries, whose part in the  fur trade  took them Northwest of the Laurentian Divide (separating the watersheds of  Lake Superior  and  Hudson Bay ). Nor'Wester canoe sessions travel wilderness waterways of northern  Manitoba  and  Ontario , and backpack Nor'Westers have traveled to different wilderness areas of the  Rocky Mountains . Nor'Wester sessions are designed to offer greater challenge and responsibility to their participants, who also learn new skills such as the navigation of class I-II  whitewater  for canoe Nor'Westers.

The culmination of Menogyn's invitation-only long trips is a series of 50-day sessions that travel in some of the most remote and austerely beautiful wilderness areas of  North America . Canoe sessions include Hommes du Nord (Men of the North) and Femmes du Nord (Women of the North), which choose historic wilderness rivers of Canada's Far North. Backpack sessions include the Wahkanee (for young women) and Waputik (for young men) trips, which like Menogyn, take their names from the first people of Menogyn's area. Wahkanee, for example, translates loosely into "sacred walk across the land."

Special programs include a wood canvas canoe building program as well as a cedar strip building program, started and run by compassionate employees of the camp. The designs are adaptations of what the camp has been using for 80 years, and culminates into the best craft for the job. Currently the camp has 3 cedar strip canoes with one in progress, and then a fleet of 17 wood canvas canoes with another in progress.

YMCA  Camp Menogyn employs three full-time, year-round staff, in the positions of Director, Program Director, and Caretaker, as well as a summer staff of approximately 40 people. Summer staff includes trail counselors, or guides, who work directly with youth to facilitate wilderness travel experiences, as well as in-camp support staff. Support staff include a Trips Coordinator who manages equipment and travel logistics, a Trail Department coordinator who oversees the packing out of food for all Menogyn's trips, a kitchen staff of four cooks who provide made-from-scratch, family-style meals that are a camp signature, a  Canoe  Master, charged with the upkeep and repair of Menogyn's fleet of classic cedar-canvas, whitewater, and aluminum canoes, as well as the rotating volunteer position of Health Officer, a  Registered Nurse  or  Medical Doctor  who oversees the physical well-being of campers and staff.