A  mid-air collision  is an  aviation accident  in which two or more aircraft come into unplanned contact during flight. Owing to the relatively high velocities involved and the likelihood of subsequent impact with the ground or sea, very severe damage or the total destruction of at least one of the aircraft involved usually results.

The potential for a mid-air collision is increased by miscommunication, mistrust, error in navigation, deviations from  flight plans , and the lack of  collision-avoidance systems . Although a rare occurrence in general due to the vastness of open space available, collisions often happen near or at airports, where large volumes of aircraft are spaced more closely than in general flight.

The first recorded collision between aircraft occurred at the "Milano Circuito Aereo Internazionale" meeting held between 24 September and 3 October 1910 in  Milan , Italy. On 3 October, Frenchman  René Thomas , flying an  Antoinette IV  monoplane, collided with British Army Captain  Bertram Dickson  by ramming his  Farman III  biplane in the rear. [1]  Both pilots survived, but Dickson was so badly injured that he never flew again. [2] [3] [4]

The first fatal collision occurred in  Douai , France, on 19 June 1912. Captain Marcel Dubois and Lieutenant Albert Peignan, both of the French Army, crashed into one another, killing both pilots. [5]

There are many types and causes of mid-air collisions. On some occasions, military aircraft conducting training flights inadvertently collide with civilian aircraft. Before 1958, civilian air traffic controllers guiding civilian flights and military controllers guiding military aircraft were both unaware of the other's aircraft. [ citation needed ]

The 1958 collision between  United Airlines Flight 736  and a fighter jet, as well as another U.S. military/civilian crash one month later involving Capital Airlines Flight 300, hastened the signing of the  Federal Aviation Act of 1958  into law. The act created the Federal Aviation Agency (later renamed the  Federal Aviation Administration ), and provided unified control of airspace for both civil and military flights.

In 2005, as part of an effort to reduce such military/civilian mid-air collisions in U.S. airspace, the  Air National Guard  Flight Safety Division, led by Lt Col Edward Vaughan, used the  Disruptive Solutions Process  to create the  See and Avoid  web portal. In late 2006, the U.S. Defense Safety Oversight Council (DSOC) recognized and funded the site as its official civil/military mid-air collision prevention website, with participation by all the services. [ citation needed ]

6