The  Midland Main Line  is a major  railway line in England  from London to  Sheffield  in the north of England. The line is under the  Network Rail  description of Route 19; [2]  it comprises the lines from London's  St Pancras station  via  Leicester ,  Derby / Nottingham  and  Chesterfield  in the  East Midlands .

Express passenger services on the line are operated by  East Midlands Trains . The section between St Pancras and Bedford is electrified and forms the northern half of  Thameslink  (mainly operated by  Thameslink and Great Northern ), with a fast service to  Brighton  and other suburban services.

A northern part of the route, between Derby and Chesterfield, also forms part of the  Cross Country Route  operated by  CrossCountry . Tracks from  Nottingham  to  Leeds  via  Barnsley  and Sheffield are shared with  Northern .  East Midlands Local  also operates regional and local services using parts of the line.

The Midland Main Line was built in stages between the 1830s and the 1870s. The earliest section was opened by the  Midland Counties Railway  between  Nottingham  and  Derby  on 4 June 1839. [3]  On 5 May 1840 the section of the route from  Trent Junction  to  Leicester  was opened. [4]

The line at Derby was joined on 1 July 1840 by the  North Midland Railway  to  Leeds Hunslet Lane  via  Chesterfield ,  Rotherham Masborough [n 1] ,  Swinton  and  Normanton .

On 10 May 1844 the  North Midland Railway , the  Midland Counties Railway  and the  Birmingham and Derby Junction Railway  merged to form the  Midland Railway .

Without its own route to London, the  Midland Railway  relied upon a junction at Rugby with the  London and Birmingham Railway  line for access to the capital at  London Euston . By the 1850s the junction at Rugby had become severely congested. The Midland Railway employed  Thomas Brassey  to construct a new route from Leicester to  Hitchin  via  Kettering ,  Wellingborough  and  Bedford . [5]  giving access to London via the  Great Northern Railway  from Hitchin. The  Crimean War  resulted in a shortage of labour and finance, and only £900,000 (equivalent to £77,430,000 in 2015) [6]  was available for the construction, approximately £15,000 for each mile. [7]  To reduce construction costs the railway followed natural contours, resulting in many curves and gradients. Seven bridges and one tunnel were required, with 60ft cuttings at Desborough and Sharnbrook. There are also major summits at Kibworth, Desbrough and at Sharnbrook where a 1 in 119 gradient from the south over 3 miles takes the line to 340 feet (100 m) above sea level. This route opened for coal traffic on 15 April 1857, goods on 4 May and passengers on 8 May [8]  and the section between Leicester and Bedford is still part of the Midland Main Line.

While this took some of the pressure off the route through Rugby, the GNR insisted that passengers for London alight at Hitchin, buying tickets in the short time available, to catch a GNR train to finish their journey.  James Allport  arranged a seven-year deal with the  GN  to run into Kings Cross for a guaranteed £20,000 a year (equivalent to £1,720,000 in 2015). [6]  Through services to London were introduced in February 1858. [9]

This line met with similar capacity problems at Hitchin as the former route via Rugby, so a new line was constructed from  Bedford  via  Luton  to  St Pancras [10]  which opened on 1 October 1868. [7]  The construction of the London extension cost £9,000,000 [11]  (equivalent to £730,290,000 in 2015). [6]

As traffic built up, the Midland opened a new deviation just north of  Market Harborough railway station  on 26 June 1885 to remove the flat crossing of the  Rugby and Stamford Railway . [12]

Plans by the  Midland Railway  to build a direct line from  Derby  to  Manchester  were thwarted in 1863 by the builders of the  Buxton line  who sought to monopolise on [ clarification needed ]  the  West Coast Main Line .

In 1870 the Midland Railway opened a new route from Chesterfield to Rotherham which went through Sheffield.

The mid-1870s saw the Midland line extended northwards through the  Yorkshire Dales  and  Eden Valley  on what is now called the  Settle–Carlisle Railway .

Before the line closures of the  Beeching era , the lines to  Buxton  and via  Millers Dale  during most years presented an alternate (and competing)  main line  from London to Manchester, carrying named expresses such as  The Palatine . Express trains to Leeds and Scotland such as the  Thames–Clyde Express  mainly used the Midland's corollary  Erewash Valley line , returned to it then used the  Settle–Carlisle line . Expresses to  Edinburgh Waverley , such as  The Waverley  travelled through Corby and Nottingham.

Most Leicester-Nottingham local passenger trains were taken over by diesel units from 14 April 1958, taking about 51 minutes between the two cities. [13]

When the  Great Central Main Line  closed in 1966, the Midland became the only direct main-line rail link between London and the East Midlands and parts of  South Yorkshire .

The  Beeching cuts  and electrification of the  West Coast Main Line  brought an end to the marginally longer London–Manchester service  via Sheffield .

In 1977 the Parliamentary Select Committee on Nationalised Industries recommended considering  electrification of more of Britain's rail network , and by 1979 BR presented a range of options that included electrifying the Midland Main Line from London to Yorkshire by 2000. [14]  By 1983 the line had been  electrified  from Moorgate to Bedford, but proposals to continue electrification to Nottingham and Sheffield were not implemented.

The introduction of the High Speed Train ( HST ) in May 1983, following the Leicester area resignalling, brought about an increase of the ruling line speed on the fast lines from 90 miles per hour (140 km/h) to 110 miles per hour (180 km/h).

Between 2001 and 2003 the line between Derby and Sheffield was upgraded from 100 miles per hour (160 km/h) to 110 miles per hour (180 km/h) as part of Operation Princess, the  Virgin -funded CrossCountry route upgrade.

In January 2009 a new station,  East Midlands Parkway , was opened between Loughborough and Trent Junction, to act as a  park-and-ride  station for suburban travellers from  East Midlands  cities and to serve nearby  East Midlands Airport . [15]

Most recently 125 miles per hour (201 km/h) running has been introduced on extended stretches. Improved signalling, increased number of tracks and the revival of proposals to extend electrification from Bedford to Sheffield are underway. Much of this £70 million upgrade, including some line-speed increases, came online on 9 December 2013 [16]  (see below).

Network Rail published a Route Utilisation Strategy for freight in 2007; [17]  over the coming years a cross-country freight route will be developed enhancing the  Birmingham to Peterborough Line , increasing capacity through Leicester, and remodelling  Syston  and  Wigston  junctions.

Traffic levels on the Midland Main Line are rising faster than the national average, with continued increases predicted. In 2006 the  Strategic Rail Authority  produced a Route Utilisation Strategy for the Midland Main Line to propose ways of meeting this demand; [18]   Network Rail  started a new study in February 2008 and this was published in February 2010. [19]   [20] [21] [22]  After electrification, the North Northamptonshire towns (Wellingborough, Kettering and Corby) are planned to have an additional 'Outer Suburban service' into London St. Pancras, similar to the  London Midland 's Crewe – London Euston services to cater for the growing commuter market. North Northamptonshire is a major growth area, with over 7,400 new homes planned to be built in Wellingborough [23]  and 5,500 new homes planned for Kettering. [24]  The service will be operated by new  Class 387s . [25]

Highlights include: [26]

On 16 July 2012, the  Department for Transport  announced plans to reconfigure the existing electrified section and to electrify most of the line by 2020 at an expected cost of £800 million. [32]  In January 2013 Network Rail expected the electrification to cost £500 million and be undertaken in stages during  Control Period 5  (April 2014 – March 2019), [33]  with Bedford to Corby section electrified by 2017, Kettering to Derby and Nottingham by 2019 and Derby to Sheffield by 2020. [34]

The plans were put on hold in June 2015 by the  Transport Secretary ,  Patrick McLoughlin . [35]  In September 2015, the Department for Transport announced revised completion dates of 2019 for Corby and Kettering and 2023 for the line further north to Leicester, Nottingham and Sheffield. [36] [37]

On 20 July 2017, it was announced that the Kettering-Nottingham-Sheffield electrification project had been cancelled and that  bi-mode trains  would be used on the route. [38]  However the section of line between Clay Cross and Sheffield is planned to be electrified for HS2 by 2033 to enable classic-compatible services to reach Sheffield along the "M18/Eastern Route". [39]

In the Route Utilisation Strategy, Network Rail recommended the  Class 801  in 10 car formations for the InterCity services, [40]  two 775 metres (848 yd) freight loops south of Bedford and between Kettering and Leicester for longer and heavier freight services, additional infrastructure to accommodate additional freight and passenger train paths and also recommended an additional stop at Kettering for the semi-fast London-Sheffield service.

The electrification is part of the wider  Electric Spine  project to create an electrified route from the  Port of Southampton  to Sheffield and possibly Doncaster. The project will mean electrifying the  Varsity Line  (Bedford – Oxford), the  Cherwell Valley / Great Western Main Lines  (Oxford/Aynho Junction – Reading) and the  Reading to Basingstoke Line . The  South Western Main Line  between Basingstoke and Southampton will be converted to overhead AC electrification from third rail DC power. [30]

Further possible electrification associated: [30]

The  Thameslink Programme  has seen the platforms at most stations south of Bedford lengthened to 12-car capabilities. St Pancras, Cricklewood, Hendon and Luton Airport Parkway were already long enough, whilst bridges at Kentish Town mean it cannot expand beyond the current 8-car platform length. West Hampstead Thameslink has had a new footbridge installed and a new station building constructed. In September 2014 the current Thameslink Great Northern franchise was awarded and trains on this route are currently operated by  Thameslink . In 2018 the Thameslink network will additionally be expanded with some  Southern  services being merged into it.

In 2013/14  Nottingham  station was refurbished and the platforms restructured.

As part of Wellingborough's Stanton Cross development,  Wellingborough  station is to be expanded. [41]

Ilkeston  between  Nottingham  and  Langley Mill  was opened on 2 April 2017. [42]

Two new stations are planned:

Some new stations have been proposed:

The term Midland Main Line has been used from the late 1840s to describe any route of the  Midland Railway  on which express trains were operated.

It is first recorded in print in 1848 in Bradshaw’s railway almanack of that year. [49]  In 1849 it begins to be mentioned regularly in newspapers such as the Derby Mercury. [50]

In 1867 the Birmingham Journal uses the term to describe the new railway running into  St Pancras railway station . [51]

In 1868 the term was used to describe the Midland Railway main route from North to South through Sheffield [52]  and also on routes to Manchester, Leeds and Carlisle.

Under British Rail the term was used to define the route between St Pancras and Sheffield, but in more recent times, Network Rail has restricted it in its description of Route 19 [2]  to the lines between St. Pancras and Chesterfield.

The principal operator is  East Midlands Trains , which operates 5 InterCity trains every hour from  London St Pancras  with two trains per hour to  Nottingham  and  Sheffield  and one train per hour to  Corby . EMT use  Class 222  Meridian trains in various carriage formations for most of its InterCity services. Traditional 8 coach  HSTs  are used for its Nottingham fast service as well morning/evening Leeds services.

Thameslink  provides frequent, 24-hour [53]  commuter services south of Bedford under the name of  Govia Thameslink Railway  (GTR) as part of its  Thameslink route  to  London Bridge ,  Gatwick Airport ,  Brighton  and  Sutton , using 4-car electric  Class 319 ,  Class 377   Electrostar  trains which can be coupled into 8- and 12-car formations.They will be replaced by a  Class 700   Desiro City .

CrossCountry  runs half-hourly services between Derby and Sheffield on its route between the South West and North East, and hourly services from Nottingham to Birmingham and Cardiff.  Northern  runs an hourly service to Leeds from Nottingham via Alferton and Barnsley.

Other operators include  TransPennine Express  in the Sheffield area.

The cities, towns and villages currently served by the MML are listed below. Stations in bold have a high usage. This table includes the historical extensions to Manchester (where it linked to the West Coast Main Line) and Carlisle (via Leeds where it meets with the 'modern' East Coast Main Line).

Network Rail groups all lines in the East Midlands and the route north as far as Chesterfield and south to London as route 19. The actual line extends beyond this into routes 10 and 11.

For marketing and franchising, this is no longer considered part of the Midland Main Line : see  Manchester, Buxton, Matlock and Midlands Junction Railway

The line was once the Midland Railway's route from  London St Pancras  to  Manchester , branching at Ambergate Junction along the  Manchester, Buxton, Matlock and Midlands Junction Railway , now known as the  Derwent Valley line . In days gone by, it featured named expresses such as  The Palatine . Much later in the twentieth century, it carried the  Midland Pullman .

This line was closed in the 1960s between  Matlock  and  Buxton , severing an important link between Manchester and the  East Midlands , which has never been satisfactorily replaced by any mode of transport. A section of the route remains in the hands of the  Peak Rail  preservation group, operating between Matlock and  Rowsley  to the north.

For marketing and franchising, this is no longer considered part of the Midland Main Line : see  Settle–Carlisle Railway .

World War I prevented the  Midland Railway  from finishing its direct route through the  West Riding  to join the  Settle and Carlisle  (which would have cut six miles from the journey and avoided the need for reversal at  Leeds ).

The first part of the Midland's West Riding extension from the main line at  Royston (Yorks.)  to  Dewsbury  was opened before the war. However, the second part of the extension was not completed. This involved a viaduct at Dewsbury over the  River Calder , a tunnel under Dewsbury Moor and a new approach railway into  Bradford  from the south at a lower level than the existing railway (a good part of which was to be in tunnel) leading into Bradford Midland (or  Bradford Forster Square ) station.

The 500 yards (460 m) gap between the stations at Bradford still exists. Closing it today would also need to take into account the different levels between the two Bradford stations, a task made easier in the days of electric rather than steam traction, allowing for steeper gradients than possible at the time of the Midland's proposed extension.

Two impressive viaducts remain on the completed part of the line between Royston Junction and Dewsbury as a testament to the Midland's ambition to complete a third direct Anglo-Scottish route. The line served two goods stations and provided a route for occasional express passenger trains before its eventual closure in 1968.

The failure to complete this section ended the Midland's hopes of being a serious competitor on routes to Scotland and finally put beyond all doubt that Leeds, not Bradford, would be the West Riding's principal city. Midland trains to Scotland therefore continued to call at Leeds before travelling along the Aire Valley to the  Settle and Carlisle . From Carlisle they then travelled onwards via either the  Glasgow and South Western  or  Waverley Route . In days gone by the line enjoyed named expresses such as the  Thames–Clyde Express  and  The Waverley .

As with most railway lines in Britain, the route used to serve far more stations than it currently does (and consequently passes close to settlements that it no longer serves). Places that the current main line used to serve include

The following on the original  North Midland Railway  line

Looking south along the Midland Main Line at  St. Albans

The Erewash Valley Line, part of the Midland Main Line. Seen here at Stapleford

British Rail High Speed Train near  Chesterfield

Leeds railway station , a former key reversal point on the Midland Main Line on the route north

Route map :  Google