The  Moika Palace  or  Yusupov Palace  ( Russian :  Дворец Юсуповых на Мойке , literally the Palace of the Yusupovs on the Moika) was once the primary residence in  St. Petersburg ,  Russia  of the  House of Yusupov . The building was the site of  Grigori Rasputin 's murder in the early morning of December 17, 1916. [1]

The palace was first built around 1776 by the French architect  Jean-Baptiste Vallin de la Mothe . Over the years a number of architects worked on the palace including the famous Italian sculptor  Emilio Sala , producing a variety of architectural styles. Andrei Mikhailov reconstructed the building during the 1830s when the  Yusupovs  became owners of the building. This was the period that the palace achieved its present-day appearance.

From 1830 to 1917, the palace belonged to the  House of Yusupov , an immensely wealthy [2]  family of Russian nobles, known for their philanthropy and art collections. Thus in the time of Imperial Russia, the palace became known as the Yusupov Palace.

The luxurious interiors of the palace were not inferior to those of contemporary royal palaces. [ citation needed ]  More than 40,000 works of art, including works by  Rembrandt , jewelry, and sculptures decorated the palace. [ citation needed ]  Following the  Russian Revolution , the Yusupov art collections were nationalized and relocated in the  Hermitage  and other museums.  Ernst Friedrich von Liphart , who was the curator of paintings at the Hermitage, had earlier painted the curtain and ceiling of the palace theatre. [3]

The palace was the scene of the assassination of  Grigori Rasputin  by a monarchist group which included Prince  Felix Yusupov , heir to the vast Yusupov family estates. [4]  These included four palaces in St. Petersburg. The palace on the Moika was reportedly the prince’s favorite residence in the capital.

The exact events surrounding Rasputin's death are still in dispute. What seems clear is that on 30 December [ O.S.  17 December] 1916, Felix Yusupov, along with  Vladimir Purishkevich  and  Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich  invited  Grigori Rasputin  to the Moika Palace. He took Rasputin to a small but lavishly furnished cellar room of the palace. There he served Rasputin red wine. When Rasputin was affected, Yusupov retrieved a revolver and shot Rasputin from the side. Taking him for dead, Yusupov went upstairs to where the other conspirators waited in a ground floor study/drawing room. Rasputin succeeded in fleeing through a side door into a gated courtyard which opened onto the street outside. Purishkevich then shot Rasputin in the back, on the doorstep. The body was taken inside and a third bullet, fired at close range, entered his forehead. The conspirators wrapped Rasputin in a broadcloth, drove outside the city and threw the body into the  Malaya Neva .

The  Russian Revolution  followed shortly after Rasputin's death and once the  Soviets  came to power, they confiscated the property of the nobles. In 1925, the palace was handed over to the city's Education Commissariat. While most nobles' palaces were converted to mundane use, the Education Commissariat decided to preserve the mansion as a public museum. Today the palace serves as a "Palace of Culture for Educators". Second floor reception areas and that part of the building associated with Rasputin's murder, are maintained as a museum open to public tours. [5] [6]  The courtyard where Rasputin attempted to flee from his killers is now occupied by a kindergarten playground adjacent to the main building.