￼

Mon   ( 紋 ) , also  monshō   ( 紋章 ) ,  mondokoro   ( 紋所 ) , and  kamon   ( 家紋 ) , are  Japanese  emblems used to decorate and identify an individual or family. While  mon  is an encompassing term that may refer to any such device,  kamon  and  mondokoro  refer specifically to emblems used to identify a family. [ further explanation needed ]  An authoritative  mon  reference compiles Japan's 241 general categories of  mon  based on structural resemblance (a single  mon  may belong to multiple categories), with 5116 distinct individual  mon  (it is however well acknowledged that there exist lost or obscure  mon  that are not in this compilation). [1] [2]

The devices are similar to the  badges  and  coats of arms  in European  heraldic  tradition, which likewise are used to identify individuals and families.  Mon  are often referred to as  crests  in Western literature, another European heraldic device similar to the  mon  in function.

Mon  may have originated as fabric patterns to be used on clothes in order to distinguish individuals or signify membership of a specific  clan  or organization. By the twelfth century, sources give a clear indication that heraldry had been implemented as a distinguishing feature, especially for use in battle. It is seen on flags, tents, and equipment.

Like European heraldry,  mon  were initially held only by  aristocratic  families, and were gradually adapted by commoners. On the battlefield,  mon  served as army  standards , even though this usage was not universal and uniquely designed army standards were just as common as  mon -based standards (cf.  sashimono ,  uma-jirushi ).  Mon  were also adapted by various organizations, such as merchant and artisan  guilds , temples and shrines, theater troupes and even criminal gangs. In an illiterate society, they served as useful symbols for recognition.

Japanese traditional  formal attire  generally displays the  mon  of the wearer. Commoners without  mon  often used those of their patron or the organization they belonged to. In cases when none of those were available, they sometimes used one of the few  mon  which were seen as "vulgar", or invented or adapted whatever  mon  they wished, passing it on to their descendants. It was not uncommon for shops, and therefore shop-owners, to develop  mon  to identify themselves.

Rules regulating the choice and use of  mon  were somewhat limited, though the selection of  mon  was generally determined by social customs. It was considered improper to use a  mon  that was known to be held by someone else, and offensive to use a  mon  that was held by someone of a high rank. When  mon  came into conflict, the lower-ranked person sometimes changed their  mon  to avoid offending their superior. The  mon  held by the ruling clans of Japan, such as  Tokugawa 's  hollyhock   mon  and the Emperor's  chrysanthemum   mon , were legally protected from unauthorized usage.

Occasionally, patron clans granted the use of their  mon  to their  retainers  as a reward. Similar to the granting of the patron's surnames, this was considered a very high honor. Alternatively, the patron clan may have added elements of its  mon  to that of its retainer, or choose a completely different  mon  for them.

There are no set rules in the design of a  mon . Most consist of a  roundel  encircling a figure of plant, animal, man-made, natural or celestial objects, all abstracted to various degrees. Religious symbols, geometric shapes and  kanji  were commonly used as well.

Similar to the  blazon  in European heraldry,  mon  are also named by the content of the design, even though there is no set rule for such names. Unlike in European heraldry, however, this "blazon" is not prescriptive—the depiction of a  mon  does not follow the name—instead the names only serve to describe the  mon . The pictorial depictions of the  mon  are not formalized and small variations of what is supposed to be the same  mon  can sometimes be seen, but the designs are for the most part standardized through time and tradition.

The degree of variation tolerated differ from  mon  to  mon  as well. For example, the paulownia crest with 5-7-5 leaves is reserved for the prime minister, whereas paulownia with fewer leaves could be used by anyone. The imperial chrysanthemum also specifies 16 petals, whereas chrysanthemum with fewer petals are used by other lesser imperial family members.

Japanese heraldry does not have a  cadency  or quartering system, but it is not uncommon for  cadet  branches of a family to choose a slightly different  mon  from the senior branch. Each princely family ( Shinnōke ), for example, uses a modified chrysanthemum crest as their mon.  Mon  holders may also combine their  mon  with that of their patron, benefactor or spouse, sometimes creating increasingly complicated designs.

Mon  are essentially monochrome; the color does not constitute part of the design and they may be drawn in any color.

Virtually all modern Japanese families have a  mon , but unlike before the  Meiji Restoration  when rigid social divisions existed,  mon  play a more specialized role in everyday life. On occasions when the use of a  mon  is required, one can try to look up their families in the temple registries of their ancestral hometown or consult one of the many genealogical publications available. Many websites also offer  mon  lookup services. Professional  wedding planners ,  undertakers  and other "ritual masters" may also offer guidance on finding the proper  mon .

Mon  are seen widely on stores and shops engaged in traditional crafts and specialties. They are favored by  sushi  restaurants, which often incorporate a  mon  into their logos.  Mon  designs can even be seen on the  ceramic  roof tiles of older houses.  Mon  designs frequently decorate  senbei ,  sake ,  tofu  and other  packaging  for  food  products to lend them an air of elegance, refinement and tradition. The  paulownia   mon  appears on the obverse side of the  500 yen coin .

Items symbolizing family crafts, arts or professions were often chosen as a  mon . A fan design might be chosen by a  geisha . A woman may still wear her maiden  mon  if she wishes and pass it on to her daughters; she does not have to adopt her husband's or father's  mon . Flowers, trees, plants and birds are also common elements of  mon  designs. [3]

Mon  add formality to a  kimono . A kimono may have one, three or five  mon . The  mon  themselves can be either formal or informal, depending on the formality of the kimono. Very formal kimono display more  mon , frequently in a manner that makes them more conspicuous. In the dress of the ruling class, the  mon  could be found on both sides of the chest, on each sleeve, and in the middle of the back. On the armor of a warrior, it might be found on the  kabuto  (helmet), on the  do  (breast plate), and on flags and various other places.  Mon  also adorned coffers, tents, fans and other items of importance.

As in the past, modern  mon  are not regulated by law, with the exception of the  Imperial Chrysanthemum , which doubles as the national emblem, and the paulownia, which is the mon of the office of  prime minister  and also serves as the emblem of the  cabinet  and government (see  national seals of Japan  for further information). Some local governments and associations may use a  mon  as their logo or  trademark , thus enjoying its traditional protection, but otherwise  mon  are not recognized by law. One of the best known examples of a  mon  serving as a corporate logo is that of  Mitsubishi , a name meaning "three lozenges" (occasionally translated as "three  water chestnuts "), which are represented as rhombuses. [4]  Another example of corporate use is the logo for the famous  soy sauce  maker  Kikkoman , which uses the family  mon  of the founder, [5]  and finally, the logo of music instrument/equipment and motorcycle builder  Yamaha , which shows three  tuning forks  interlocked into the shape of a capital  Y  in reference to both their name and the origin of the company. [6]

Agehanochō , the  Swallowtail butterfly  crest of the  Taira clan

Kiyobu Chō  (Butterfly)

Mythical  Three-legged crow   Yatagarasu

Crane crest of  Mori clan  similar to  Japan Airlines

Triple crane crest

Quintuple  Chidori  bird crest

Mitsu uroko , three fish-scales, of  Hōjō clan

Maruni Chigai Takanoha , the crossing pair of hawk feathers in circle

3 monkey crest

Kotobuki Ebi  Shrimp emblem

This  paulownia  flower pattern ( go-shichi-no-kiri ) is the symbol of the Office of the  Prime Minister of Japan  and  Toyotomi Clan

Daki  Myōga  (Japanese ginger)

Gomaizasa, the five  bamboo  leaves of the Shofukutei  Rakugo  family

Maruni Mitsu(ba) Aoi , the  hollyhock  crest of the  Tokugawa clan

Maruni Sumitate Yotsumei  Circle and Four Eyelets on the Edge of the  Uda Genji

Sasarindō, the  bamboo  leaves and  gentian  flowers crest of the  Minamoto clan

Sumikirikakuni Hanakaku

Tachi Omodaka  or Upright Threeleaf Arrowhead ( Sagittaria trifolia )

Triple Pine Tree  Maruni Hidari Sangaimatsu  of Hira clan, member of  Taira clan (Heike)

Jūroku Uragiku , crest of the Hirohata clan

Mitsugumi Tachibana  (Triple  Mandarin orange )

Hana Wachigai , the device of the  Izumo Genji clans (Oki, Enya,  Takaoka )

Matsudaira clan   gold leaf  emblazoned hollyhock

Yotsu Hanabishi , the emblem of the  Yanagisawa clan ,  Matsumoto family  of  kabuki  actors

Sparrows and Bamboo  Take ni Suzume  of the  Date clan

6 coin  crest of  Sanada clan

Hinomaru  emblazoned  hand fan  representing Japan, crest of Satake clan

Tang Dynasty  style  hand fan  crest

Wheel motif of  Genji clan

Gion Mamori  shield motif

Chigai Kuginuki   Crowbar , the crest of former Prime Minister  Taro Aso

Nakagawake Kurusu  (the cross of  Nakagawa clan )

Nail Puller   Kuginuki

Yamabishi, the crest of the  Yamaguchi-gumi   yakuza  clan

Chigai Bishi

Eyes motif  Janome Shichiyo

Marunouchi Mitsuhikiryō

Mitsu Irekomasu , the crest of the Ichikawa family of  kabuki  actors

Musubi Mitsugashiwa  (a  triquetra )

Suzugohei

Emblem of  Itsukushima  Shrine in Hiroshima

Triple  Star  Emblem of Mitsuboshi, of Watanabe clan and  Mori clan .

9  tomoe  emblem

Nitōnami  Wave emblem of Saito clan.

Origami  paper crane emblem

Well motif similar to crest of  Sumitomo Group .

Japanese Shinto  torii  shrine crest.

Buddhist  Swastika  crest.

Chinese character  motif crest of  Ishida Mitsunari .