Monostroma kuroshiense , a  green alga  in the division  Chlorophyta , is a green seaweed endemic to  Kuroshio Coast  of Japan. This high-value seaweed is called Hitoegusa or Hirohano hitoegusa (ヒロハノヒトエグサ) in Japanese. Previously this algae was known in binomen  Monostroma latissimum , but the latest scientific research based on multilocal phylogeny discovered that this is a new species. [1]  This algae is commercially cultivated in  East Asia  and  South America  for the edible product "hitoegusa-nori" or "hirohano-hitoegusa nori", popular  sushi  wraps.  Monostroma   oligosaccharides  with  degree of polymerization  6 prepared by  agarase  digestion from  Monostroma nitidum   polysaccharides  have been shown to be an effective prophylactic agent during  in vitro  and  in vivo  tests against  Japanese encephalitis  viral infection. The sulfated oligosaccharides from  Monostroma  seem to be promising candidates for further development as antiviral agents. [2]  The  Monostroma  genus is the most widely cultivated genus among green  seaweeds .

The distribution endemic to Japanese  Kuroshio  Coast.

Found in intertidal rocks of saline and estuarine environments with various seawater salinities (35 to 24 PSU).

A number of peer-reviewed scientific literature exists on the ecophysiology of this algal genus. [3]  Natural and cultivated sexually reproducing environmental samples, as well as sexually reproducing and serendipitously discovered asexually reproducing  ecotype s of monostromatic green alga from  Tosa Bay , Japan are conspecific (belong to the same species). [4]  Patterns of seasonal fluctuations in its thallus lengths were  habitat  specific and recur annually. [5]  Both appearance and decay of thalli were earlier at high saline habitats, suggesting that salinity positively influences either maturation of  sporophyte s or senescence of  gametophyte s. Results from life cycle, thallus ontogeny, gametangial ontogeny and phylogenetic analyses suggest that this algal genus is evolutionarily affiliated in order ulotrichales. [6]  Type of life cycle is not a valid diagnostic character for the species circumscription in Monostromataceae. [7]

This is an edible green algae extensively used as nori in sushi.