Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution  is a  1902   essay  collection by  Russian   anarchist   philosopher   Peter Kropotkin . The essays, initially published in the  English  periodical  The Nineteenth Century  between  1890  and  1896 , explore the role of mutually-beneficial  cooperation  and reciprocity (or " mutual aid ") in the  animal  kingdom and human societies both past and present. It is an argument against the  competition -centred theories of so-called  social Darwinism , as well as the romantic depictions of cooperation presented by writers such as  Jean-Jacques Rousseau , who argued it was motivated by universal love rather than self-interest.  Mutual Aid  is considered a fundamental text in  anarchist communism , presenting a scientific basis for communism alternative to the  historical materialism  of the  Marxists . Many biologists also consider it an important catalyst in the scientific study of cooperation.

Daniel P. Todes , in his account of Russian naturalism in the 19th century, concludes that Kropotkin’s work "cannot be dismissed as the idiosyncratic product of an anarchist dabbling in biology" and that his views "were but one expression of a broad current in Russian evolutionary thought that pre-dated, indeed encouraged, his work on the subject and was by no means confined to leftist thinkers." [1]

Kropotkin pointed out the distinction between the direct struggle among individuals for limited resources (generally called competition) and the more metaphorical struggle between organisms and the environment (tending to be cooperative). He therefore did not deny the competitive form of struggle, but argued that the cooperative counterpart has been underemphasized: "There is an immense amount of warfare and extermination going on amidst various species; there is, at the same time, as much, or perhaps even more, of mutual support, mutual aid, and mutual defense...Sociability is as much a law of nature as mutual struggle." [2]

As a description of biology, Kropotkin's work has been confirmed by recent research.  Stephen Jay Gould  admired Kropotkin's observations, noting that cooperation, if it increases individual survival, is not ruled out by  natural selection , and is in fact encouraged. [3]  Modern biology confirms Kropotkin's observations in two ways. When different species appear to aid each other, it is a case of  mutualism . When individuals within a species aid each other, it is a case of  altruism in animals , including  kin selection  and  reciprocal altruism .  Douglas H. Boucher  places Kropotkin's book as a precursor to the development of mutualism as a theory. [4]