Nic Waal , born Caroline Schweigaard Nicolaysen in  Kristiania ,  Norway  (1 January 1905 - 28 May 1960) was a  Norwegian   psychiatrist , noted for her work among children and adolescents in Norway where she is known as "the mother of Norwegian pediatric and adolescent psychiatry." She was also active in the  Norwegian resistance  during  World War II , and was named as one of the  Righteous among the Nations  by  Yad Vashem . [1] [2] [3]

Caroline Schweigaard Nicolaysen (known in her childhood as Bitteba) was the youngest of four children born to Vilhelm Bernhoft Nicolaysen, an Army officer, and Anna Horn. She grew up in the section of Oslo known as  Homansbyen , apparently an active and curious child, but also unusually sensitive. According to her son  Helge Waal , she was prone to  psychosomatic  illnesses as a young child; and indeed she completed her first year of  gymnasium  at home, due to illness. She attended  Oslo Katedralskole  starting in the fall of 1921, where her schoolmates included  Trygve Bull ,  Karl Evang , and  Trygve Braatøy . [1]

She attended the  University of Oslo , became politically active as a radical socialist, and finished her medical studies in 1930. She was associated with the  Mot Dag  movement and worked as an editor in the periodical  Æsculap . The political convictions she developed as a student set the foundation for a lifelong engagement in social causes, especially related to the needs of children, adolescents, and women. [1]

Plagued with her own emotional problems all her life, she first underwent  psychoanalysis  with  Harald Schjelderup  in Norway while she was a student. In 1927 she married the writer  Sigurd Hoel . [4]  She continued her psychoanalysis in  Berlin  as a student under  Salomea Kempner , [5]  and in 1933 and 1934 she was accepted in the German and Danish-Norwegian Psychoanalytic associations, respectively. [2]  In 1936, Sigurd Hoel and she divorced, and in 1937 she married  Wessel Waal  and took the last name Waal for good. [1]

While in Berlin, Waal became associated with  Wilhelm Reich  and accompanied him when he fled Nazi persecution by moving to Norway. She continued her training first under another refugee from the Nazi regime, the  Austrian   Otto Fenichel , and then with Reich until 1939, when she opened her own psychoanalytic practice and joined the staff at  Gaustad psychiatric hospital , where she remained on staff until 1947. [3]

During the  German occupation  of Norway from 1940 to 1945, Waal became active in the underground resistance to the occupation. Among other activities, she was central in assuring the escape of  Jewish children from Oslo , thereby saving them from  deportation  and  certain death . [6]  For this effort, she was named among the  Norwegian Righteous among the Nations . She was also active in the Norwegian clandestine intelligence service,  XU . [7]  In the spring of 1945, she was briefly arrested and escaped to Sweden.

Waal resumed her professional activities immediately after the war. She remained on the staff at Gaustad and also at  Ullevål hospital , but also worked in  Denmark ,  United States ,  Switzerland , and  France , with  Serge Lebovici . She was remembered by  Cyrille Koupernik  as "that Norwegian madwoman". In 1951, she was board certified as a psychiatrist, and in 1953, as one of the first in Norway, within paediatric and adolescent psychiatry. [1]

Soon after her application to be the chief of staff at the newly formed Institute for Paediatric and Adolescent Psychiatry at  Rikshospitalet  was turned down (supposedly because her physical presentation was messy) in 1951, she started her own institute, named  Nic Waals Institutt ; first in her basement in the suburb  Husebygrenda  and eventually to the "blue house" in  Munkedamsveien  near  Skillebekk . [1]

Waal remained professionally active as the director of her institute until her death in 1960, also finding time to help juvenile offenders. She had two children with Wessel Waal, the psychiatrist  Helge Waal  (who also became her biographer) and the child psychologist  Berit Waal Skaslien . She divorced Waal and married  Alex Helju  in 1951, who died in a boating accident in 1954. [1] [8]

In spite of her personal problems, Nic Waal maintained an active and passionate professional life, integrating advocacy on public health issues, a strong interest in teaching, and clinical discipline into a broad range of issues in her field. She made lasting contributions within the areas of: [1]

When interviewed by the  Norwegian radio  shortly before her death, she said:

[3]

The Nic Waal Institute, though renamed for some time, now continues as a leading regional teaching and clinical institution in Oslo under the auspices of  Lovisenberg Diakonale Sykhus . [9]