The  nitridoborates  are chemical compounds of boron and nitrogen with metals. These compounds are typically produced at high temperature by reacting hexagonal  boron nitride  (α -BN) with metal  nitrides  or by  metathesis reactions  involving nitridoborates. A wide range of these compounds have been made involving  lithium ,  alkaline earth  metals and  lanthanides , and their structures determined using crystallographic techiques such as  X-ray crystallography . Structurally one of their interesting features is the presence of  polyatomic anions  of boron and nitrogen where the geometry and the B-N bond length have been interpreted in terms of  π-bonding . Many of the compounds produced can be described as ternary compounds of metal boron and nitrogen and examples of these are Li 3 BN 2 , Mg 3 BN 3 , La 3 B 3 N 6 , La 5 B 4 N 9 . [1]  However there are examples of compounds with more than one metal, for example La 3 Ni 2 B 2 N 3 [2]  and compounds containing anions such as  Cl − , for example Mg 2 BN 2 Cl. [3]

Examination of the crystallographic data shows the presence of polyatomic units consisting of boron and nitrogen. These units have structures similar to those of isoelectronic anions, which have π-bonded structures. The bonding in some of these compounds is ionic in character, such as Ca 3 [BN 2 ] 2 , other compounds have metallic characteristics, where the bonding has been described in terms of π-bonded anions with extra electrons in anti-bonding orbitals that not only cause a lengthening of the B-N bonds but also form part of the conduction band of the solid. [4]  The simplest ion BN n−  is comparable to the C 2 2−  ion, but attempts to prepare the compound CaBN analogous to CaC 2   calcium carbide  failed. The bonding of compounds containing the diatomic BN anion have been explained in terms of electrons entering anti-bonding orbitals and reducing the B-N bond order from 3 (triple bond) in BN 2−  to 2 (double bond) in BN 4− . [5]

Some nitridoborates are salt-like such as Li 3 BN 2 , LiCa 4 [BN 2 ] 3  others have a metallic lustre, such as LiEu 4 [BN 2 ] 3 . Bonding calculations show that the energy of the valence orbitals of metal atoms of group 2 and lanthanide elements are higher than those of the bonding orbitals in BN x  ions which indicates an ionic like interaction between a metal atom and a BN x  ion. With lanthanide compounds where extra electrons enter the anti-bonding orbitals of an ion there can be a smaller band gap giving the compounds metal like properties such as lustre. With transition metals the d orbitals can be similar in energy to bonding orbitals in the BN anions suggesting covalent interactions. [4]

For comparison purposes the following are considered to be typical BN bond lengths [1]

Mes= 2,4,6 Me 3 C 6 H 2