Noah and Nelly in... SkylArk  (1976–1977) is a children's cartoon series produced by  Bob Godfrey 's Movie Emporium.

Noah and Nelly  was created by  Grange Calveley , writer of the earlier and better known  Roobarb  cartoon. The five-minute films depict a world loosely based around Noah's Ark. However, Calveley's surreal interpretation involves two-headed talking animals reminiscent of the  pushmi-pullyu  known to  Doctor Dolittle . Each animal has a cheerful, optimistic head at one end and an unhappy, pessimistic head at the other. Even the SkylArk itself is a longship with a figurehead at either end, one smiling, the other frowning. Although there is only one animal of each type, they are referred to in the plural - Brian the lions and Rose the Elephants. As with the earlier  Roobarb , the main narration is provided by British actor  Richard Briers . However, co-narrator  Peter Hawkins  manages to find a different and appropriate voice for each of the many animals.

The story follows roughly the same pattern each episode. Captain Nutty Noah consults his map and randomly picks out a place to visit. The SkylArk is then shown travelling to its destination by balloon, on wheels, underwater with snorkelling figureheads or occasionally even by sea. On arriving at their destination, the SkylArk's crew find various strange inhabitants such as talking television sets who are suffering some kind of problem they can't solve themselves (for example, the television sets are stuck showing the news over and over again and getting bored). The animals often help in some way, but the day is invariably saved by Noah's wife Nelly, who uses her knitting skills to create machines which solve the problem in some way. Nelly knits everything from drilling rigs to crash helmets; her supply of wool seems almost inexhaustible but she occasionally has to unravel the ship's sails when she runs out.

The illustration style used in  Noah and Nelly  appears to have developed from the style used for  Roobarb , but cel animation is used where  Roobarb  had marker drawings. Although this technique is arguably more polished, it does not create the same degree of "boiling" (i.e., deliberate misalignment of successive frames of animation) that was used to such innovative effect in the earlier series. Producer  Bob Godfrey  seems to have deliberately gone back to a more rough and ready style for his third cartoon series  Henry's Cat , which was also better known than  Noah and Nelly . It seems that more mainstream production techniques may have led to  Noah and Nelly's  ending up less famous than its siblings, in spite of its unique storyline and witty script. Equally, however, it could simply be down to the fact that  Noah and Nelly  was not repeated anywhere near as frequently as its stablemates; its final repeat run (which only covered selected episodes, not the full 26) was in 1980, a mere four years after it began, and it has not been shown on British television since. By contrast, both  Roobarb  and  Henry's Cat  were repeated into the 1990s and beyond.

The series was released on VHS in the mid 1990's under the names of Noah and nelly in the skylark volume 1 and Noah and nelly in the skylark volume 2. Both these VHS tapes are very rare.