The  NSDAP/AO  was the Foreign Organization branch of the  National Socialist German Workers Party  (NSDAP).  AO  is the abbreviation of the German  compound word   Auslands-Organisation  (English: Foreign Organization). Although it would be correctly written in one word, the Nazis chose an obsolete spelling with a  hyphen .

The party members who lived outside the  German Reich  were pooled in this special NSDAP department. On May 1, 1931 the new organizational unit was founded on the initiative of  Reich Organization Leader  ( German :  Reichsorganisationsleiter )  Gregor Strasser  and its management was assigned to  Hans Nieland . But Nieland resigned from office on May 8, 1933, because he had become head of the  Hamburg  police authority, and later, a member of the Hamburg provincial government, whereupon  Ernst Wilhelm Bohle  was appointed director of the "AO", which served as the 43rd and only non-territorial  Gau  of the NSDAP. Only actual citizens of the German Reich – ( German :  Reichsdeutsche ) – with a German  passport  could become members of the  AO . Persons of German descent, so called  ethnic Germans  ( German :  Volksdeutsche ), who possessed the nationality of the country in which they lived, were refused entry to the Nazi Party.

In 1928, in  Paraguay  and in  Brazil , party members abroad joined forces for the first time. Similar associations came into being in  Switzerland  and in the  United States  in 1930. These groups had been officially accepted by the NSDAP only after the founding of the  Auslands-Organisation . On August 7, 1931 Local Group Buenos Aires was accepted. Shortly thereafter followed National Committee Paraguay (August 20, 1931) and Local Group Rio de Janeiro (October 5, 1931). From 1932 until its prohibition in 1934 there existed a national committee in the  Union of South Africa , which enjoyed great popularity ( see   German Namibians ) and maintained numerous offices in the former  German South-West Africa  (today  Namibia ). NSDAP  Local Groups  ( German :  Ortsgruppen ) included at least 25  party comrades  ( German :  Parteigenossen ), while the so-called  Stützpunkte  (English: bases) had five members or more. Furthermore, large Local Groups could be partitioned into  Blocs  ( German :  Blöcke ).

Ideological training and congruity of all party comrades with the interests of the German nation were the principal tasks of the NSDAP/AO. It was assigned the mandate of uniting all NSDAP party members (and members of NSDAP-affiliated organizations) living abroad in a loosely affiliated group and to educate them in the philosophy, ideology and political programs of the NSDAP for the betterment of Germany. The AO was not a  Fifth Column  organization [ citation needed ]  and had ten basic principles to be followed that included:

These and the other principles were intended to create a feeling of amiability towards Germans and Germany in general and hopefully convince as many foreigners as possible that the NSDAP was the right choice for Germany, and as result, the rest of the world.

By the early 1940s, the NSDAP/AO had around 50 organized members in the  Dominican Republic , a relatively large number considering that the German-born population in the country stood at around 150 with an additional 300 persons of German descent. NSDAP had organized groups in five Dominican cities:  Santo Domingo ,  Puerto Plata ,  Montecristi ,  Cibao Valley  and  San Pedro de Macorís . [1]

NSDAP/AO had a  Landesgruppe Schweden . During the first years of  World War II  it was led by W. Stengel, but the leadership was later taken over by the German diplomat Heinz Gossmann. There were several  Ortsgruppen  in different parts of Sweden, such as  Gothenburg ,  Borås , etc. [2]