Nātyakalpadrumam  (നാട്യകല്‍‌പദ്രുമം in  Malayalam , नाट्यकल्पद्रुमम् in  Devanagari ) is a book written by (late)  Nātyāchārya Vidūshakaratnam  Padma Shri  Guru   Māni Mādhava Chākyār [1]  (who was the ultimate exponent of  Koodiyattam  and  Abhinaya ) [2]  about all aspects of ancient  Sanskrit  drama theatre tradition of  Kerala -  Kutiyattam . It was first published in  Malayalam  (1975) by  Kerala Kalamandalam , with financial assistance of  Sangeet Natak Academi ,  New Delhi . [3]  This monumental work serves as the reference to scholars and students. The entire book is written in the old  Sanskrit  text style closely following  Nātyaśāstra . Both structure and content of the book illustrates the excellence of the author in both Sanskrit and Nātyaśāstra. It has received the prestigious  Kerala Sahitya Academy  Award  for the year 1975. [4]  The book has been translated and published in  Hindi  by Sangeet Natak Akademi, New Delhi. [5]

Natyakalpadruma - theatrical study written by Mani Madhava Chakiar the great Guru of Koodiyattam the traditional Sanskrit theatre, is divided into eight chapters. The cover photo shows the famous  Pakarnnaatta-Abhinaya  (male character enacting female character) of the maestro in Koodiyattam. Preface of the book is written by renowned scholar Shri Kunjunni Raja. [6]  The book contains  Navarasa  photos of the maestro along with many of his rare Koodiyattam photos.

The author begins his work with an introduction and a few benedictory and introductory versus written in Sanskrit language. Here he salutes Gods, Goddesses and his great Gurus like  Panditaratnam   Pannisseri Sankaran Nampoothiripad  and  His Highness  Darsanakalanidhi   Rama Varma Parikshith Thampuran . Then he summarises the beginning of  Nātya  and  Nātyaveda  as told by the great sage  Bharata  in his monumental work  Nātyaśāstra  and salutes the sage. Then in one stanza the author narrates his horoscope (Jataka) which depicts his scholarship in  Jyotisha . Then again he prays for the blessings of sage Bharatha the propagator of  Nātya  on the earth.

In the last stanza he compares his work to the  Kalpadruma - the heavenly tree which gives everything requested. Nātyakalpadruma also gives all details about  Nātya  that is Koodiyattam and so the name of the work  Nātyakalpadruma  is meaningful in all senses.

The eight chapters included in this work are

The first chapter  Samjnaprakarana  gives the names of costumes and other materials used in Koodiyattam. A detailed description of different names etc. used in Koodiyattam for different steps, actions etc. are also given in this chapter.

The second chapter  Paribhashapakarana  gives the names and descriptions of different types of narration, enacting, characters, their languages, characteristic features etc. This chapter also narrates different types of  acting  which are included in koodiyattam on special occasions. For example how to act on stage without dialogue such things like capital city, mountain, trees, garden, hermitage, seasons, heaven etc. are given presicely. Famous  Abhinaya s (acting) such as  Kailasoddhārana  (lifting of  Kailasa ),  Pārvatī Viraha  (separation of Pārvatī) etc. are also included in this chapter. Details of wearing different  costumes  and different types of  abhinaya  are also given here.

The third chapter  Mudra-Taalaprakarana  gives elaborate narration of  Mudras  (movements of hands and fingers), their names and their usage in Abhinaya. Different  Taalas  used in Koodiyattam are also described here. The usage of different  Taalas  according to different  Swaras  ( Rāgas ) and different contexts is the next point discussed in this chapter.

The fourth chapter,  Swaraprakarana  deals with different Swaras (Ragas) used in Koodiyattam they are 20 in number which are called  Muddan, Shreekantthi, Thondu, Aarthan, Indalam, Muralindalam, Veladhuli, Danam, Veeratarkan, Tarkan, Korakkurunji, Paurali, Poraneeru, Dukkhagandharam, Chetipanchamam, Bhinnapanchamam, Shreekamaram, Kaishiki, Ghattanthari and Anthari . Details of their usage in abhinaya according to Rasas, Characters, Contexts etc. are also narrated with suitable examples.

The fifth chapter which is called  Rasaprakarana  deals with  Satwika-Abhinaya  ( Satwikābhinaya )- the most important one among the four types of  Abhinayas . Topics such as Nātya, Nritya, Nritta,  Rasa , Bhava, Vibhava, Anubhāva, Satwikabhāva, Vyabhicharibhāva, their enacting, movements of eyes for different Rasas and  Bhavas  etc. are also discussed here . Some examples of  Rasābhinaya  (Rasa-Abhinaya) are also given. Thus this chapter gives a clear picture of the theory and practice regarding Rasābhinaya. The minute details of  Netrābhinaya - enacting with eyes, eyes only are given here by the greatest master of Netrābhinaya.

The sixth chapter  Abhyāsaprakarana  deals with practical training in Koodiyattam. Here the author gives twenty one types of eye movement which are to be practiced by a Koodiyattam artist who specialises in Rasābhinaya. These are very important for Koodiyattam artist as well as artists from other classical art forms. Special duties of  Chakiars  (actors),  Nangiarammas  (actresses) and  Nambiars  (drummers who play  Mizhavu ) are also narrated here in detail .

Drishtāntaprakarana  the seventh chapter contains examples of different types of  abhinaya , narrations of different types of stories and conversations etc. used in Koodiyattams. Peculiarities of languages to be used in different contexts by different characters are also given here.

The last chapter  Vaisheshikaprakarana  gives  Slokas  used as benedictory verses in the beginning of different Koodiyattams with and without  Abhinaya , Slokas used in  Nirvahana , Slokas used at the time of elaborate special Abhinayas such as the beauty of heroine etc.,  Slokas  used by  Vidūshaka  (Vidushaka) which are mostly in regional language  Malayalam  or  Prakrit , examples of stories used by Vidushaka etc. It also gives the details of special stage arrangements to be made for the performance of some rare scenes. Then the author gives the special rules and regulations to be observed by the Koodiyattam troop at the time of performance especially when it is done in a  Koothampalam  (traditional theatre) or in a traditional  Hindu   temple  which are the real stages of this traditional, classical art form. Some special rights of traditional families of artists are also given. Details of special performance in some traditional Hindu temples in Kerala are also discussed in this chapter.

Thus the work as a whole contains all details regarding the traditional classical temple art. One can see the footsteps of the great scholar, great artist and great  Achārya  (teacher or Guru) who lived on the stage for about 80 golden years, in this commendable work. His skill in all aspects of Koodiyattam especially the unparalleled Netrābhinaya are world famous.

This monumental work has been published in  Hindi  by  Sangeet Natak Akademi ,  New Delhi  (1996). The translation was done by  Chakyar Koothu - Koodiyattam artist and son of Guru Māni Mādhava Chākyār, PK Govindan Nambiar- and edited by Dr.  Prem Lata Sharma .  [7]   [8]