The  Panzerlied  is one of the best known  Wehrmacht  songs. It was composed in June 1933 by  Oberleutnant  Kurt Wiehle while on his way to  Königsbrück . Wiehle adapted a German sailor's song, writing lyrics more appropriate to the  Panzerwaffe .  At the time, Germany was clandestinely developing an armored force in defiance of the  Treaty of Versailles . The song could be considered as a reflection of the  German re-armament , launched in the same time frame as the song was written.

It has gained fame in the English-speaking world due to its usage in the 1965 film  Battle of the Bulge . [1] [2]  While throughout that film German characters speak English, the song is sung in the original German.

In 2017, the  German army  was banned from publishing song books containing Panzerlied and other marching songs by the  Minister of Defence   Ursula von der Leyen  as part of new efforts at  denazification . [3]

Chile  has the biggest German community in South America, as a proportion of its population, due to waves of immigration from Germany during the 19th-20th centuries. Hence German influence is great in Chile. Around 1870, Chilean president  Domingo Santa María  initiated a program of military reform with the help of Prussian instructors like  Emil Körner . Due to this and the influence of the large community of German immigrants, the Chilean military borrowed many military traditions of the old Prussian army and the modern German army. The "Panzerlied" became the official hymn of the armored forces in the  Chilean army  and is sung during parades. The lyrics were translated to  Castilian Spanish , but the title was left unchanged. The Panzerlied has become one of the most widely recognized German traditions among the Chilean people.

The song is also sung by some motorized and parachute units of the Italian army. In France, the lyrics were adapted slightly to become the  Marche des Chars  used by the  501e régiment de chars de combat , [4]  and the tune was borrowed for the  French Foreign Legion 's song  Képi Blanc . [5]

The Korean adaptation of the song is also used by the South Korean Army as a march for the country's tank and motorized units.

The second half of the Panzerlied tune is used as chorus for the unofficial anthem for the  German community of Namibia , and the unofficial anthem of the then  South African -ruled  South-West Africa  (present day  Namibia ). This song is known as "Das Südwesterlied" or "Hart wie Kamelherndorz".

The first, second and fifth stanzas of the song are used by the  Brazilian Army  under the title of "Canção Da Tropa Blindada" (Eng. "Song Of the Armored Troops") with the lyrics translated to Portuguese.

Originally, the last two lines of every verse were repeated. It was later changed so that only the last line is repeated.

There are many versions online, including:

- The Original - The "Battle" Version - The 1945  Battle of the Bulge  Version

Original Version from 1933-1945:

Ob's stürmt oder schneit, ob die Sonne uns lacht, 
Der Tag glühend heiß, oder eiskalt die Nacht, 
Verstaubt sind die Gesichter, doch froh ist unser Sinn, ja, unser Sinn.

Es braust unser  Panzer  im Sturmwind dahin.  (x2)

Whether it storms or snows, whether the sun smiles on us, 
The day burning hot, or ice cold the night, 
Dusty are our faces, but joyful is our mind, yes, our mind.

Our tank roars there in the storm's wind.  (x2)

Mit donnernden Motoren, geschwind wie der Blitz, 
Dem Feinde entgegen, im Panzer geschützt, 
Voraus den Kameraden, im Kampfe stehn wir allein, stehn wir allein.

So stoßen wir tief in die feindlichen Reih'n.  (x2)

With thundering engines, as fast as lightning, 
Against the enemies, sheltered in the tank, 
Ahead of our comrades, in battle we stand alone, we stand alone.

So we push deep in the enemy's ranks  (x2)

Wenn vor uns ein feindlicher Panzer erscheint, 
Wird Vollgas gegeben und ran an den Feind. 
Was gilt denn unser Leben für uns'res Reiches Heer? Ja, Reiches Heer.

Für Deutschland zu sterben ist uns're höchste Ehr'.  (x2)

If a hostile tank appears before us, 
Full throttle and run at the enemy (orders) will be given. 
What do our lives matter for our Reich's army? Yes, Reich's army.

To die for Germany is our highest honor. (x2)

Mit Sperren und Minen hält der Gegner uns auf, 
Wir lachen darüber und fahren nicht drauf. 
Und droh'n vor uns Geschütze versteckt im gelben Sand, Ja, gelben Sand.

Wir suchen uns Wege, die keiner sonst fand.  (x2)

With obstacles and mines the opponent holds us up, 
We laugh about it and don't drive upon them. 
And guns threaten before us, hidden in the yellow sand, yes, yellow sand.

We search our way that none other found.  (x2)

Und läßt uns im Stich einst das treulose Glück, 
Und kehren wir nicht mehr zur Heimat zurück, 
Trifft uns die Todeskugel, ruft uns das Schicksal ab, ja, Schicksal ab.

Dann wird unser Panzer ein ehernes Grab.  (x2)

And if we're left behind by treacherous luck, 
And if we can't return back home anymore, 
If Death's bullet finds us, and calls our fate away, yes, fate away.

Then our tank will become a rigid grave.  (x2)

Panzlied "Battle" Version:

Ob's stürmt oder schneit, ob die Sonne uns lacht, 
Der Tag glühend heiß, oder eiskalt die Nacht, 
Verstaubt sind die Gesichter, doch froh ist unser Sinn, ja, unser Sinn.

Es braust unser Panzer im Sturmwind dahin.  (x2)

If it storms or snows, if the sun smiles on us, 
The day burning hot, or the ice cold the night. 
Dusty are our faces, but joyful is our mind, yes, our mind.

Our tank roars there in the storm's wind.  (x2)

Mit donnernden Motor, zu schnell wie der Blitz, 
Dem Feinde entgegen, im Panzer geschützt. 
Voraus den Kameraden, im Kampfe ganz allein, ja ganz allein.

So stoßen wir tief in die feindlichen Reih'n!  (x2)

With thundering engines, as fast as lightning, 
Towards the enemy, sheltered in the tank. 
Ahead of our comrades, In the fight all alone, yes all alone.

So we push deep into the enemy lines!  (x2)

Wenn vor uns ein feindlicher Panzer erscheint, 
Wird Vollgas gegeben und ran an den Feind. 
Was gilt denn unser Leben für uns'res Reiches Heer? Ja, Reiches Heer.

Für Deutschland zu sterben ist uns're höchste Ehr'.  (x2)

When before us a hostile tank appears, 
Full throttle is given and we close with the enemy. 
What does our life matter for the Reich's army? Yes, Reich's army.

To die for Germany is our highest honor.  (x2)

Mit Sperren und Tanks hält der Gegner uns auf, 
Wir lachen darüber und fahren nicht drauf. 
Und schüttelt er gar grämlich, und wütend seine Hand, ja seine Hand.

Wir suchen uns Wege, die keiner sonst fand.  (x2)

With barriers and tanks the foe blocks our path, 
We laugh about it and don't drive upon them. 
And even if their hand shakes morosely and furiously, yes their hand.

We search for ways, that no one else found.  (x2)

Und läßt uns im Stich einst das treulose Glück, 
Und kehren wir nicht mehr zur Heimat zurück, 
Trifft uns die Todeskugel, ruft uns das Schicksal ab, ja, Schicksal ab.

Dann wird unser Panzer ein ehernes Grab!  (x2)

And if we are abandoned by treacherous luck, 
And if we don't return home again, 
If death's bullet finds us, and fate calls us away, yes, us away.

Then our tank shall become an iron grave!  (x2)

The 1965 war movie  Battle of the Bulge  has the most popular rendition of Panzerlied to date, and is frequently referenced with the song. The movie version repeats the first stanza 4 times, omitting the rest of the song.

The 2012 anime  Girls und Panzer  features an instrumental version of the song as one of the primary leitmotifs of Kuromorimine Women's College (the other being  Erika ). The show features boot stomping sounds accompanying the music, in reference to the version used in  Battle of the Bulge . The  2015 movie sequel  also features the song as a theme with another instrumentation.

The second part of the melody was used as part of the  Südwesterlied  (1937), the unofficial anthem of  Namibian Germans .

An instrumental version was used in the 1999 PlayStation game  Panzer Front .

The song was used in the  BlackICE  mod for the 2009 grand strategy game  Hearts of Iron III .

The song was used in the 2016 grand strategy game  Hearts of Iron IV .