Paul O. Müller  (b.  April 18 ,  1915  in  Graz ; d.  March 9   1942  at  Pechenkino  near  Sukhinichi ) was an  Austrian   theoretical   nuclear physicist  who worked in the German  Uranverein . He was drafted into the German armed forces and died on the  Russian Front  in  World War II . [1]

Müller did  graduate studies  at the  University of Graz . He received his  doctorate  in Graz on February 25 1939, under  Erwin Schrödinger . [2] [3]

After 1939, Müller and  Karl-Heinz Höcker  collaborated with  Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker  at the  Kaiser-Wilhelm Institut für Physik  (KWIP, after World War II reorganized and renamed the  Max Planck Institute for Physics ), in  Berlin-Dahlem , on the theory behind the  Uranmaschine  (uranium machine, i.e.,  nuclear reactor ). [2]

Many at the KWIP and those working on the  Uranmaschine  had the classification of  unabkömmlich  ( uk , indispensable) and were exempt from being drafted into armed service. Both Müller and his colleague Höcker had the classification  uk , but their fates were quite different. As the war raged on, the demand for men to provide armed service resulted in Höcker and Müller being drafted in late 1940 or early 1941. Not even  Kurt Diebner , managing director of the KWIP, could stop the call-up. Höcker was returned to the KWIP in 1942 due to poor health; Müller had died at the  Russian front . It was not until 1944 that Werner Osenberg, head of the planning board at the  Reichsforschungsrat  (RFR, Reich Research Council), was able to initiate calling back 5000 engineers and scientists from the front to work on research categorized as  kriegsentscheidend  (decisive for the war effort). By the end of the war, the number recalled had reached 15,000. Many of the scientists called for military service were at institutes under the  Kaiser-Wilhelm Gesellschaft  (Kaiser Wilhelm Society). [4] [5] [6] [7]

The following reports were published in  Kernphysikalische Forschungsberichte  ( Research Reports in Nuclear Physics ), an internal publication of the German  Uranverein . The reports were classified Top Secret, they had very limited distribution, and the authors were not allowed to keep copies. The reports were confiscated under the Allied  Operation Alsos  and sent to the  United States Atomic Energy Commission  for evaluation. In 1971, the reports were declassified and returned to Germany. The reports are available at the  Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center  and the  American Institute of Physics . [8] [9]