Paul Whitty  (born 1970) is an  England -based experimental composer and sound artist born in  Northern Ireland .

Paul Whitty was born in Lisburn, Northern Ireland, in 1970 and is currently Professor of Composition at  Oxford Brookes University . [1]  He is a founder and director of the Sonic Art Research Unit (SARU). He studied with Roger Marsh,  Magnus Lindberg ,  Colin Matthews , Vinko Globokar and  Michael Finnissy .

His work has been performed by the  London Sinfonietta ,  Ensemble Expose ,  IXION ,  Michael Finnissy , [rout],  Philip Howard , and  Mieko Kanno  amongst others, and his music has featured at festivals including  Brighton ,  Ultima  in Oslo, the  Gaudeamus  Music Week in Amsterdam, the  Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival , the 54th Venice Biennale [2]  and at State Of The Nation in London. He has received awards, including from the  Arts Council of England ,  AHRC , the Britten-Pears Foundation, and the British Council.

Paul Whitty is a founder, along with the composers  Sam Hayden  and  Paul Newland , of the ensemble [rout], which has made concert tours in the UK, appearing on  BBC  Radio 3's contemporary music programme Hear and Now, on a BMIC Cutting Edge concert tour, at the ICA and at the Huddersfield Festival.

He is Professor in Composition; Research Lead for Film, Fine Art and Music; and a Director of the Sonic Art Research Unit at  Oxford Brookes University  and has been a visiting tutor in collaborative practice at  Dartington College of Arts  and the  Laban Centre , London. He is a Director of audiograft, Oxford's Festival of experimental music and sound art, with Stephen Cornford.

He has become increasingly interested in collaborative cross-disciplinary work methods, often involving on-site projects and installations. Projects have taken place at the Mecca State Bingo Hall in Kilburn, Addenbrookes Hospital in Cambridge, and the office of Beaconsfield art gallery in Vauxhall.

One of Paul's more recent collaborative works Vauxhall Pleasure (2004-2009) with  Anna Best  consisted of a site event at  Vauxhall  Cross, London; an installation at the Museum of Garden History as part of their Tempered Ground exhibition, and two performances at Tate Britain. In November 2009 a concert version of the project took place at the Warehouse, London as part of the BMIC Cutting Edge Series, in the form of a film, an installation and a live performance.