Pere Marquette State Park  is an 8,050-acre (3,260 ha) protected area in southwestern  Jersey County, Illinois ,  United States . [1]  It is located near the city of  Grafton, Illinois , at the confluence of the  Mississippi River  and the  Illinois River . The park is located on  Illinois Route 100 , which at this location is also part of both the  Great River Road  and the  Meeting of the Great Rivers Scenic Byway . The park is operated and maintained by the  Illinois Department of Natural Resources , and is Illinois' largest state park in area. The park is also part of the  Confluence Greenway  and is at the northwestern end of the 21.5-mile (34.6 km)  Sam Vadalabene Bike Trail .

The park was named in honor of Father (Père)  Jacques Marquette , a  Jesuit  priest who was the co-leader, with his comrade  Louis Jolliet , of a 1673 voyage of  exploration  on the Mississippi River. [1]  Marquette was the first European to  map  the mouth of the Illinois River, which he and Joliet used to return from the Mississippi to the  Great Lakes .

At the mouth of the Illinois River, the explorers found one of the richest and most densely settled regions of  North America , fully utilized by  Native Americans  of the  Illini Confederacy . Large catches of fish, shellfish, and waterbirds were yielded from the rivers and adjacent  wetlands . On top of the river bluffs, fertile windblown  loess  and topsoil could be used to grow  corn ,  beans , and  squash .

During the years since 1673, many changes have taken place to this region. The beds of  mussels  and other shellfish have dwindled, harmed by  over-harvesting  and possible disease. Exotic fish, such as the  Asian carps , have swum into the rivers and have partially replaced native species such as  largemouth bass ,  bluegill ,  catfish , and  crappie .

One signature Pere Marquette State Park species, the American  bald eagle , has made a remarkable comeback that started in the 1990s. Hundreds of eagles that nest in the wetland areas to the north congregate in and around the park areas in late winter to catch and eat fish during the cold months.

In the late 1950s through 1968 the area just north of the Lover's Leap lookout area was the site of an active  Project Nike  missile site, constructed for the defense of St. Louis during the  Cold War .

Pere Marquette State Park was founded in 1931 as the  Piasa Bluffs State Park , but was soon renamed. The park's heart is a  Civilian Conservation Corps -built lodge, first built in the 1930s and later expanded in 1985 to contain 72 rooms. A  visitor center , with exhibits on local  ecology  and  history , opened in 1997. The lodge and surrounding cabins were listed on the  National Register of Historic Places  in 1985. [3]

The park contains approximately 12 miles (19 km) of marked trails. Approximately 230 species of bird have been logged in the park, and a horseback riding stable operates during the warmer months. There is also a 2,000-acre (810 ha) public hunting area for  deer ,  squirrel ,  wild turkey , and other target species. There are also several launching ramps for private boats to enter the Illinois and Mississippi Rivers. [1]

The park includes a geologic  anticline , an upward arching of stratified rock dated to crustal movement circa 200 million years BP. The feature has been named the  Lincoln Anticline . At  Cap-au-Grès  the two sides of the fold can be observed having parted and moved away from each other. [4]