The  Phantom Blot  is a fictional character featured in various media by  The Walt Disney Company . He is an enemy of  Mickey Mouse . He first appeared in the Mickey Mouse comic strip adventure  Mickey Mouse Outwits the Phantom Blot  by  Floyd Gottfredson , which was published in the form of daily strips from May 20 to September 9, 1939. [1]

The Phantom Blot, or simply "The Blot", made his first appearance in  Mickey Mouse Outwits the Phantom Blot . In this story,  Chief O'Hara  hires Mickey to capture this new criminal who calls himself The Blot. According to O'Hara, he is the smartest thief they've ever met.  Detective Casey , however, calls this new criminal a looney. The only thing he steals is cameras of a special type and he smashes them open on the spot. [2]  The strange crime and the motive behind it resembles closely the  Sherlock Holmes  story  The Adventure of the Six Napoleons . In the end, Blot is captured and unmasked. The Phantom Blot's gaunt face and thin mustaches were sometimes rumored to be based on the features of  Walt Disney . [3]  Most later stories featuring the villain don't unmask him, in order to give him a more mysterious character.

Many artists and writers have furthered the Phantom Blot throughout the years. The first re-appearance was in the  Italian  story  Topolino e il doppio segreto di Macchia Nera , written by  Guido Martina  and drawn by  Romano Scarpa , published in 1955 in issues 116–119 of  Topolino , the main Italian Disney magazine. In the United States, after a long absence, he was revived in the serial "The Return of The Phantom Blot" (drawn by  Paul Murry ) that ran in issues 284–287 (May–August 1964) of  Walt Disney's Comics and Stories . [4]  This was followed by a comic book series of seven issues (1964 to 1966) devoted to the Blot and his crimes. He next turned up in the mid-1970s in two issues of  Super Goof  written by  Mark Evanier  and drawn by Roger Armstrong. Comic book historian Joe Torcivia notes Armstrong was the first to draw the character with a mouth, making him look like a shadow instead of someone under a black cloak. This convention has since been followed by many artists, including Murry.

While still being a criminal, he usually operates as the mastermind behind gangs rather than as a common crook. He prefers pulling strings rather than being directly involved.

During his career, he steals large amounts of money and invests them in business. His relative wealth allows him to finance his ambitious plans.

He is a skillful  hypnotist , and occasionally uses this skill to force others to do his bidding. He has even ordered Mickey himself to act as a criminal in order to frame him. He has quite a talent in acting. The Blot often operates in disguise and has acted under various aliases and identities, adopting many different personalities to suit his parts. He has some scientific knowledge (mainly in physics, mechanics and biology), and has often used this in his plans. He has invented various devices he uses as weapons. He claims to have an artistic nature and has considerable skill in painting, which he uses to create forgeries of famous works of art. He later proceeds in stealing the original and leaving his copy behind.

He seems to have ways to get information about everything that is going on in the city and even from the police headquarters. His ways of persuading others to follow him include using their own greed, promising them means of revenge or  blackmailing  them. He enjoys seducing citizens with no criminal records to act as his agents. He has a fairly good knowledge of  psychology  and is very skilled in spreading fear to his victims, causing them to doubt their relationships and (in some cases) even their own sanity. He often uses their vanity to turn them into pawns.

He is a master of escape. Even if the police do manage to capture and imprison him (which rarely happens), he is soon out again. Other times, he takes advantage of the terrain or weather. In one issue, where he is attempting a robbery on a winter night, he is seen in his normal black outfit. Goofy, who has taken a job as a night watchman, is patrolling the businesses when the Blot realizes he must abort his plans and says "I always come prepared", where he removes his black robes and replaces them with white ones, allowing himself to  camouflage  with the snowy streets. Though he desires money and power, his greatest lust is for fame. Some of his plans have no monetary gain for him, but their purpose is to spread fear to the public, adding to his reputation. The Blot is, himself, very vain and his desire for money and power is only surpassed by his desire to immortalize his name in "the annals of crime".

Along with Mickey Mouse,  Donald Duck ,  Goofy ,  Scrooge McDuck ,  Gyro Gearloose ,  Super Goof ,  Eega Beeva ,  Minnie Mouse , and  Chief O'Hara  have all encountered the Blot, and thus successfully tried to stop him. The Blot sometimes teams up with other bad guys like the  Beagle Boys  and Mad  Madam Mim , who is madly in love with him (while he considers her a lunatic). At the height of the villain's popularity, he was given his own comic book,  The New Adventures of the Phantom Blot , which lasted for seven issues. [1]

Recently, the Phantom Blot has appeared as a major antagonist in the  Ducktales  and  Darkwing Duck  comics published by  Boom! Studios , uniting various villains from both series.

The Blot has a daughter: she appeared for the first time in the last panel of "The Big Fall" in Mickey Mouse Adventures #7, and then soon after in "A Phantom Blot Bedtime Story" in #8. [3]  Apparently, there was a plan to make her a regular character, but that never happened. She was called "Phantom Brat" in the editorial page of issue 8, although with quotation marks around her name, so it is unclear whether that was her actual name.

His depiction in  Disney comics  has varied with the artists using him: in stories published by  Egmont , as well as  French  stories, he is always shown wearing his hood, while in  Italian  ones, he frequently appears unmasked, sometimes not wearing his cloak at all. In these, he wears everyday clothes and is unmasked, though he is still up to criminal schemes ranging from  robbery  and  smuggling  to  espionage ,  sabotage  and  extortion .

French translators often took liberties with Italian material and apparently decided that the Phantom Blot's appearances without his cloak and mask should be classified as depicting a completely different character. In the French translations of the Italian stories where the Blot appeared unmasked, he was frequently given the name  Jo Crisse  (a term usually used as a form of insult), while he retained his Italian name  Macchia Nera  in the original Italian versions.

In European stories, he is often presented as a more dangerous figure than the American version. While still trying to kill Mickey and his allies, he has other agendas as well. He has also frequently clashed with  Super Goof .

The Blot is the main antagonist of the Italian comic saga  Wizards of Mickey . [5]

The Phantom Blot's first appearance in  animation  was in  DuckTales  season 1's 63rd episode " All Ducks on Deck ", voiced by  Frank Welker . In that episode, he steals a secret bomber (which can turn invisible) from the Navy aircraft carrier on which Donald Duck serves, planning to make more invisible planes so that he can take over the world. [3]

The Phantom Blot later appeared in a short featured on  Mickey Mouse Works , based on the comic strips in which he first appeared in, titled "Mickey Foils the Phantom Blot" and originally broadcast on November 7, 1999. In this short, he steals a "radium card" from  Ludwig Von Drake  and uses it to rob every bank in the world. As the title suggests, Mickey, Donald, and Goofy manage to foil his plans. The short was double the length of most of the shorts featured on the series and is considered by many Disney fans to be the best of the  Mickey Mouse Works  shorts.

The Blot soon reappeared in another  Mouse Works  short titled "Mickey and the Color Caper", this one featured in the  Disney's House of Mouse  episode "Where's Minnie?" In this short, the Blot is now stealing colors from everything in the world, including  Minnie Mouse , simply because he's bored with his inky black cloth and plans to become  The Phantom Rainbow . Again,  Mickey Mouse ,  Donald Duck  and  Goofy  show up to foil his plans.

The Blot made one more appearance so far in the  House of Mouse  episode "House of Crime", which was wrapped around his first  Mouseworks  short. Here, he is stealing things from all over the house and then kidnapping characters both good and evil. Unbeknownst to everyone, the Blot is hiding in a device that Ludwig Von Drake has invented to give out clues to find the criminal, so he continually makes the machine give out clues that don't lead the good guys anywhere, but eventually make it seem like they lead to Mickey himself. After everybody but him disappears, Mickey at first believes he may have somehow "gone bad" and was unknowingly stealing when the lights went out, but soon figures out that the Blot is behind this and corners him. In his attempt to escape on his newly repaired blimp from his first  Mickey Mouse Works  appearance (shown as the featured cartoon earlier), it pops and the Blot is foiled once again.

The Blot makes a brief appearance in the 2016  Mickey Mouse  short "Sock Burglar". [6]

In both  Mickey Mouse Works  and  House of Mouse , the Blot was voiced by  John O'Hurley .

The character (known as  Mancha Negra  in Disney's Brazilian and Portuguese comics – Portuguese for  Black Stain ) is used as a symbol by various Brazilian associations of soccer fans (or  torcidas organizadas ) in order to feature their team colors, like  Palmeiras '  Mancha Alviverde , which features a green Phantom Blot, [7]   Cruzeiro 's  Mancha Azul  (a blue one) and  Vasco da Gama 's  Mancha Negra  (where Phantom Blot keeps his original black color). [8]  There is also a  samba school  named "Mancha Verde", also associated with Palmeiras, that uses also a Green Phantom Blot as its symbol. [9]

An altered version of the Phantom Blot appears in the video game  Epic Mickey  as the primary villain, known as the "Shadow Blot," a creature made out of magical ink and thinner that creates monstrous minions known as the Blotlings. In  Epic Mickey 2: The Power of Two , it is revealed that the Shadow Blot's destruction resulted in the creation of additional Blotlings, which are exploited by the Mad Doctor in his efforts to create a new army. At one point there were apparently plans to include the classic Phantom Blot in the series in a number of different possible roles, but he was replaced by other characters.