Philipsburg Manor  (sometimes referred to as  Philipse Manor ) was an  English manor  located north of  New York City  in the  Province of New York . It lasted from 1693 until 1779. The land was part of a Dutch  patroonship  owned by  Adriaen van der Donck  but was later purchased by  Frederick Philipse I . Philipse was granted a  royal charter  in 1693, creating the manor as a legal entity. After Philipse's death, the manor was split between his son and grandson, both of whom continued to develop the manor. The Philipses engaged in the  Atlantic slave trade , using Africans to construct most of the buildings on the property. The  tenant farmers  on the manor also represented a diverse population of Europeans.

The manor's property was eventually sold at auction after  Loyalist  Frederick Philipse III was  attainted  for treason by New York's revolutionary government and his land was confiscated. Some of the original structures still stand, including the  Philipsburg Manor House  in  Sleepy Hollow ,  Philipse Manor Hall  (the family seat) in  Yonkers , and the  Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow , all of which are  National Historic Landmarks .

The land that would become Philipsburg Manor was first bought from  Adriaen van der Donck , who had invested in an unsuccessful Dutch  patroonship  in  New Netherland  before the English takeover in 1664.  Frederick Philipse I , Thomas Delavall, and Thomas Lewis purchased the first tracts of land in 1672 in current-day northern  Yonkers . Philipse made several additional purchases between 1680 and 1686 from the  Wiechquaeskeck  and  Sinsink  Indian tribes, expanding the property both north and south of the previous purchase; he also bought a small plot of land from the  Tappans  west of the  Hudson River . The manor comprised about 52,000 acres (21,000 ha) of land. Philipse also bought out his partners' stakes during this time. [1]

The estate's boundaries were the  Spuyten Duyvil Creek  to the south, the  Croton River  to the north, the  Hudson River  to the west, and the  Bronx River  to the east. Philipse was granted a royal charter in 1693, creating the Manor of Philipsburg and making him first lord of the manor. Along with the three other main manors of the colony— Rensselaerswyck ,  Cortlandt , and  Livingston —Philipsburg created one of the richest and most powerful families in the colony. [2]  When Philipse died in 1702, the manor was divided between his son,  Adolphus Philipse , and his grandson,  Frederick Philipse II . Adolph received the Upper Mills property, which extended from  Dobbs Ferry  to the Croton River. Frederick II was given the Lower Mills at the confluence of the  Saw Mill  and Hudson Rivers; the two parcels were reunited on his uncle's death. Frederick II's son,  Frederick III , became the third lord of the manor in 1751. [1]

The Philipses used  African slaves  to build various structures at the Upper Mills and Lower Mills. The Upper Mills saw the building of two gristmills on the  Pocantico River  as well as a stone manor house, wharf, cooperage, and bake house. Most of the structures were completed by 1697, including the  Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow , now a National Historic Landmark. The Lower Mills saw a gristmill and manor house built on the north bank of the  Neperhan River . The Philipses' aim was to make the manor a center for agriculture, which the achieved. [ citation needed ]

The slaves came from 22  African cultures  from  Kongo - Angola . In the 18th century, tenant farmers moved in from  Great Britain , the  Netherlands ,  France ,  Germany , and even elsewhere within  North America . By the beginning of the  American Revolution  in 1776, the population was about 1,000, up from 200 at the time of Frederick I's death. [1]

In 1779, Frederick Philipse III, a  Loyalist , was  attainted  for treason along with his family. The manor was confiscated and sold at public auction, and the land was split between 287 buyers. The largest tract of land (about 750 acres (300 ha)), the Upper Mills, was passed to numerous owners until 1951, when it was acquired by Sleepy Hollow Restorations (now  Historic Hudson Valley ). Thanks to the philanthropy of  John D. Rockefeller Jr. , about 20 acres (8.1 ha) were restored as an historic site known as  Philipsburg Manor . [1]  The Lower Mills manor house,  Philipse Manor Hall , served as  Yonkers  City Hall from 1872 until 1908. [3]  Both houses became  National Historic Landmarks  on November 5, 1961 [4] [5]  and are now  house museums .