Piero Marini  (born 13 January 1942) is a  Roman Catholic   archbishop  who is president of the  Pontifical Committee for International Eucharistic Congresses . For twenty years he served as Master of Pontifical Liturgical Celebrations, in charge of the  Office for the Liturgical Celebrations of the Supreme Pontiff . In that capacity he worked for  Popes   John Paul II  for 18 years and  Benedict XVI  for two years.

Marini was born in Valverde,  Italy , and was  ordained  a priest of the  Catholic Church  on 27 June 1965. He holds a  doctorate  in  liturgy  from the Benedictine-run College of  Sant'Anselmo . [1]

In 1975, Marini became personal secretary to  Archbishop   Annibale Bugnini , the controversial chief architect of the liturgical reforms that followed Vatican II. [2] [3]  From 1987 to 2007, Marini was the Master of the  Office for the Liturgical Celebrations of the Supreme Pontiff , the group responsible for organizing the details of papal liturgies and other celebrations. He was seen at the pope's side in every such celebration. He was appointed  Titular Bishop  of  Martirano  on 14 February 1998 and was consecrated on 19 March by Pope John Paul II. On 29 September 2003 he was raised to the rank of Archbishop.

On 1 October 2007, after Marini had served twenty years as Master, Pope Benedict appointed him president of the  Pontifical Committee for International Eucharistic Congresses . [1]

In April 2013, in an interview with the Costa Rican newspaper  La Nacion , Marini indicated his openness to the idea of same-sex civil unions being recognised by civil law: "In these discussions, it is necessary, for example, to recognize the union of people of the same sex, because there are many couples who suffer because their civil rights are not recognized", but went on to say, "What cannot be recognized is that that couple be a marriage." [4] [5] [6]

On 26 September 2013  Pope Francis  appointed him one of five consultors to the Office of Liturgical Celebrations. [7]  He was confirmed for another five-year term as a member of the  Congregation for the Oriental Churches  in February 2014 [8]  and has headed its committee for liturgy. He was named a member of the  Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments  in October 2016. [9]

During the night between October 30 and 31, 2016, he suffered a  stroke . His condition was reported to be unstable. [10]

Marini promoted Vatican II reforms including the "simplification of rites that he believes facilitates active participation." [11]  He supports the integration of local customs into church rituals. At a celebration he oversaw in 1998, a group of scantily clad Pacific Islanders danced during the opening liturgy of the Synod for Oceania in  St. Peter's Basilica ; Pope  John Paul II 's visit to Mexico City in 2002, an indigenous Mexican  shaman  performed a purification ritual on the pope during Mass. [11]

In July 2007, when Pope Benedict gave  broader permission  for the celebration of the 1962  Tridentine Mass , Marini said that it "does not intend to introduce modifications into the current  Roman Missal  nor to express a negative judgement on the liturgical reform desired by the  Council " and described it as "a gesture at the service of unity". [12]  Marini has said he is "not nostalgic for what he regards as the repetitive nature of the old Mass, neither the exaltation of the celebrant to the detriment of the people of God; and he deplores the marked split between the priest and the assembly." [13]

When leaving his post at the Office of Liturgical Celebrations, he described his relationship with Pope Benedict XVI: [14]

I also express my heartfelt filial gratitude to Pope Benedict XVI who, immediately following his election, chose to confirm me as Master of Papal Liturgical Celebrations. To tell the truth, it was not a completely new experience for me, since I had been his master of ceremonies following his elevation to the cardinalate. For this reason too, from the very start I felt welcomed by Pope Benedict as a son. In him I could see, to my great satisfaction, not only a professor but also a Pope who is an expert in the liturgy. I will never forget the emotion I felt in finding myself alone with him in the Sistine Chapel just after his election, or the emotion I experienced during the rites of the inauguration of his Petrine ministry. These rites remain fixed in my mind and heart, since I consider them the fullest and most successful icon which the liturgy has given of the Church in the wake of the Second Vatican Council.

Marini is the author of  A Challenging Reform - Realizing the Vision of the Liturgical Renewal  ( ISBN   978-0-8146-3035-8 ).