The  Pierceton Historic District  encompasses the  central business district  of a small community in east central  Kosciusko County, Indiana . It is next to the former  Pennsylvania Railroad  line. The design, setting, materials, workmanship and association between buildings give a sense of the history and architecture of a small town main street. [2]

The development of most towns in the county is linked to the growth of the railroads. Pierceton was first platted by Lewis Keith and John B. Chapman in 1852 at the proposed location of the new  Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago railroad  right-of-way, 1.5 metres (0.0015 km) west of modern Pierceton. The town was re-charted in  1853  once the final railroad location was established. Pierceton was named President  Franklin Pierce . It soon followed by  Etna Green  in 1853 and  Atwood  in 1857. [2]

The Pierceton Historic District is a collection of brick, one- and two-story buildings that stretch along both sides of First Street from the railroad tracks, one and one half blocks south to Catholic Street. Freestanding buildings such as the old Depot and the  Carnegie Library , are found at the north and south ends of the district. However, the majority of the buildings form a consistent façade along the one hundred block of North First Street. The street grid has a regular north–south pattern with the exception of East Market Street. [2]  An 1895 fire left the west side of North First Street south of Market leveled, therefore those buildings all date from after that time. [2]

All structures are historically contributing towards the Historic District Status, unless otherwise noted. An ‘O’ rating signifies that the structure had enough historic or architectural significance to be considered for individual listing in the  National Register of Historic Places . The ‘N’ rating signifies that the structure is above average and may, with further investigation be eligible for an individual listing. The ‘C’ or contributing rating signifies that the structure meet the basic inventory qualifications, but fails to meet individual merit, but in combination with other closely placed similar structures warrants inclusion in a  historic district . [2]

East Market Street

West Market Street

East Market Street

West Catholic Street

North First Street

South First Street

106 N 1st Masonic Lodge, Pierceton, Indiana]]

117-119 First Street Leeland Hotel, Pierceton, Indiana

130 First Street, Pierceton, Indiana

136-140 First Street, Pierceton, Indiana

Old Pennsylvania Depot, Pierceton, Indiana

First Street (IOOF), Pierceton, Indiana

P& Washington Twnshp Carnegie Library, Pierceton, Indiana