The  Pilbara  ( / ˈ p ɪ l b ə r ʌ /  or  / ˈ p ɪ l b r ʌ / ) is a large, dry, thinly populated  region  in the north of  Western Australia . It is known for its  Aboriginal peoples ; its ancient landscapes; the red earth; its vast mineral deposits, in particular iron ore; and as a global biodiversity hotspot for  subterranean fauna . [1]  It is one of nine regions of the  Regional Development Commissions Act 1993 , and is also a  bioregion  under the  Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia  (IBRA). [2] [3]

The region has an estimated population of 48,610 as of June 2010 [update] . [4] [5]  The Pilbara covers an area of 502,000 km 2 , [6]  which includes some of Earth's oldest rock formations. It includes landscapes of coastal plains and mountain ranges with cliffs and gorges. The major settlements of the region are  Port Hedland ,  Karratha  and  Newman . The three main ports in this region are  Port Hedland ,  Dampier  and  Port Walcott . [7]

The area is known for its petroleum, natural gas and iron ore deposits, which contribute significantly to  Australia 's economy. Other than mining, pastoral activities as well as fishing and tourism are the main industries. [8]

The Pilbara Aboriginal Language Centre Wangka Maya says that the name for the Pilbara region derives from the Aboriginal word  bilybara , meaning 'dry' in the Nyamal and  Banyjima  languages. [9]

Alternatively, The Western Australia Gas Industry claims that the region takes its name from  pilbarra , an Aboriginal word for the  mullet (fish) . The Pilbara Creek (originally spelt "Pilbarra") is a tributary of the  Yule River , a significant river in the region.  Pilbarra  (Sea Mullet ( Mugil cephalus )) and  barramundi  ( Lates calcarifer ) can still be caught in the Yule River today. [10]  This Pilbara Creek lent its name to the Pilbara Goldfield, discovered in 1885, after which time the name was used to refer to the region. [11]

The first European to explore the area was  Francis Thomas Gregory  in 1861. Settlements along the coast at  Cossack ,  Roebourne  and  Shellborough  were established over ensuing decades as agricultural and pastoral centres. However, after c. 1900, these largely went into decline with the growth of other, more productive agricultural areas of the state. Mining in the area started in 1937 in Wittenoom Gorge, and following the discovery of iron ore in the  Hamersley Ranges  in the 1960s, the area became pivotal to the state's economy and towns built to accommodate mining and allied services boomed. [12]  On 3 October 1952, the British conducted their first atomic bomb tests on the  Montebello Islands  as part of  Operation Hurricane .

The Aboriginal population of the Pilbara considerably predates, by 30-40,000 years, the European colonisation of the region. Archaeological evidence indicates that people were living in the Pilbara even during the harsh climatic conditions of the  Last Glacial Maximum . [13]  The early history of the first peoples is held within an oral tradition, archeological evidence and petroglyphs. Near the town of Dampier is a peninsula known as  Murujuga , which contains a large collection of world heritage listed  petroglyphs , dating back thousands of years. Rock art in the Pilbara appears to have been primarily etched into the hard rock surfaces, compared to predominantly paintings on the softer sandstone in the Kimberley. This does not preclude that painting was and is not performed in the Pilbara. In 2006, it was estimated that 15% of the population of the Pilbara was of Indigenous background, approximately 6,000 people. [14]

Working conditions in the pearling and pastoral industries for Aboriginals in the Pilbara region around 1900 have been described as slavery with no wages paid, kidnapping as well as severe and cruel punishments for misbehaviour and absconding all common practices. [15]  The first strike by Indigenous people in Australia took place in  1946  in the Pilbara, when Aboriginal pastoral workers walked off the stations in protest at low pay and bad working conditions, a strike that lasted for over three years. [16]

Family clans in the Pilbara who were supported by mining prospector, Don McLeod, developed skills for mining and the concentration of  rare metals . For a short period money accumulated, which according to Aboriginal law was to be used for traditional ways. Eventually the funds were used to establish an independent Aboriginal-controlled school. [17]  The concept has expanded into a movement with around 20 similar schools established in northern Western Australia by the mid 1990s.

Many Pilbara communities face the many complex effects of colonisation, and lack adequate access to housing, health and education. [18] [19]  A 1971 survey of 1,000 Aboriginal people conducted by Pat McPherson found that most had one or more serious diseases. [20]  At the  McClelland Royal Commission  into British nuclear testing, Aboriginals from the Pilbara provided evidence regarding the explosion on the Montebello Islands. [21]

Aboriginal communities are sited over a number of different places. [22]  Many have poor infrastructure. [23] [24] [25]

Relations between police and aboriginals are very often tense. [26] [27]

Under the  Regional Development Commissions Act  Pilbara is situated south of the  Kimberley , and is made up of the  local government areas  of  Ashburton ,  East Pilbara ,  Karratha  and  Port Hedland .

The Pilbara region covers an area of 507,896 km 2  (193,826 mi 2 ) (including offshore islands), roughly the combined land area of the  US  States of  California  and  Indiana . [ citation needed ]  It has a population of more than 45,000, [28]  most of whom live in the western third of the region, in towns such as  Port Hedland ,  Karratha ,  Wickham ,  Newman  and  Marble Bar . A substantial number of people also work in the region on a  fly-in/fly-out  basis. There are approximately 10 major/medium population centres and more than 25 smaller ones

The Pilbara consists of three distinct geographic areas. The western third is the Roebourne coastal sandplain, which supports most of the region's population in towns and much of its industry and commerce. The eastern third is almost entirely desert, and is sparsely populated by a small number of  Aboriginal  peoples. These are separated by the inland uplands of the  Pilbara Craton , including the predominant  Hamersley Range  which has a considerable number of mining towns, the  Chichester Range  and others. These uplands have a number of gorges and other natural attractions.

Pilbara contains some of the world's oldest surface rocks, including the ancient fossilised remains known as  stromatolites  and rocks such as  granites  that are more than three billion years old. In 2007, some of the oldest evidence of life on Earth was found in 3.4 billion-year-old sandstones at  Strelley Pool , which preserve fossils of sulfur-processing bacteria. [29]  The mineralized spheres, which were found on an ancient beach and have a cell-like  morphology , were chemically analysed, revealing that they used  sulfur  for fuel. [30]

The climate of the Pilbara is  arid  and  tropical . [5]  It experiences high temperatures and low irregular rainfall that follows the summer  cyclones . During the summer months, maximum temperatures exceed 32 °C (90 °F) almost every day, and temperatures in excess of 45 °C (113 °F) are not uncommon. Winter temperatures rarely drop below 10 °C (50 °F) on the coast; however, inland temperatures as low as 0 °C (32 °F) are occasionally recorded.

The Pilbara town of  Marble Bar  set a world record of most consecutive days of maximum  temperatures  of 100 degrees  Fahrenheit  (37.8 degrees  Celsius ) or more, during a period of 160 such days from 31 October 1923 to 7 April 1924. [31]

The average annual rainfall in the region is between 200 and 350 millimetres (7.9 and 13.8 in). [5]  Almost all of the Pilbara's rainfall occurs between December and May, usually with occasional heavy downpours in  thunderstorms  or tropical cyclones. The period from June to November is usually completely rainless, with warm to very hot and sunny conditions. Like most of the north coast of Australia, the coastal areas of the Pilbara experience occasional tropical cyclones. The frequency of cyclones crossing the Pilbara coast is about 7 every 10 years. [5] [32]  Due to the low population density in the Pilbara region, cyclones rarely cause large scale destruction or loss of life.

The Pilbara's economy is dominated by  mining  exports and  petroleum  export industries. [35]

Most of  Australia 's  iron ore  is mined in the Pilbara, with mines mostly centred around  Tom Price  and  Newman . The iron ore industry employs 9,000 people from the Pilbara area. The Pilbara also has one of the world's major  manganese  mines, Woodie Woodie, situated 400 kilometres (250 mi) southeast of Port Hedland.

Iron ore reserves were first discovered by  Lang Hancock , and considerable portions of the Pilbara region are still claimed by his daughter  Gina Rinehart  and the family company  Hancock Prospecting  continues to gain from its interests in the region - as well as commencing its own mine workings.  Blue asbestos  was first mined in Wittenoom Gorge in 1943. [12]

In the 1960s, it was reportedly called "one of the most massive ore bodies in the world" by Thomas Price, then vice president of US-based steel company Kaiser Steel.  Geoscience Australia  calculated that the country's "economic demonstrated resources" of iron amounted to 24 gigatonnes, or 24 billion tonnes. According to the  Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics , as of 2010 [update] , that resource is being used up at a rate of 324 million tonnes a year, with rates expected to increase over coming years. Experts  Gavin Mudd  ( Monash University ) and Jonathon Law ( Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation ) expect it to be gone within 30 to 50 years (Mudd) and 56 years (Law). [36]

As of 2010 [update] , active iron ore mines in the Pilbara are:

A significant part of Pilbara's economy is based on Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) through North-West Shelf Joint Venture and Pluto LNG Plant, both operated by Woodside.

The region also has a number of cattle-grazing stations, and a substantial tourist sector, with popular natural attractions including the  Karijini  and  Millstream-Chichester  national parks, the  Dampier Archipelago  and the  Ningaloo Reef .

The first railway in the Pilbara region was the  narrow-gauge   Marble Bar Railway  between  Port Hedland  and  Marble Bar . The Marble Bar Railway opened in July 1911 and closed in October 1951. The Roebourne-Cossack Tramway opened in 1897 and many industrial railways have been built to serve the mines. [38]

Currently four heavy-duty railways are associated with the various iron-ore mines, with a fifth line proposed to serve the  Fortescue Metals Group Ltd.  mines. The railways are all  standard gauge  and are built to the heaviest North American standards. Between 2008 and 2012, Rio Tinto proposes to convert to  driverless trains  on its railways. [39]  An additional 300 km line is planned from the Roy Hill mine to a port at Boodarie, near Port Hedland. [40]

The ports of the Pilbara are:

The dominant flora of the Pilbara is  acacia  trees and shrubs and drought-resistant  Triodia   spinifex  grasses. Several species of acacia (wattle) trees are endemic to the Pilbara and are the focus of conservation programs along with wildflowers and other local specialities. [ citation needed ]

The Pilbara is home to a wide variety of endemic species adapted to this tough environment. There is a high diversity of invertebrates, including hundreds of species of  subterranean fauna  (both  stygofauna  and  troglofauna ), which are microscopic invertebrates that live underground in the caves, vugs or groundwater  aquifers  of the region and terrestrial fauna (see  short-range endemic invertebrates ). The Pilbara olive python, the  western pebble-mound mouse , and the  Pilbara ningaui  of the Hamersley Range are among the many species of animals within the fragile ecosystems of this desert ecoregion. Birds include the  Australian hobby ,  nankeen kestrel ,  spotted harrier ,  mulga parrot  and  budgerigars .

Wildlife has been damaged by the extraction of iron, natural gas and asbestos but the protection of culturally and environmentally sensitive areas of the Pilbara is now advanced by the delineation of several protected areas including the  Millstream-Chichester  and the  Karijini National Parks . [ citation needed ]

Coordinates :  21°S   119°E ﻿ / ﻿ 21°S 119°E ﻿ /  -21; 119