The  Ploudiry Parish close  ( Enclos paroissial ) is located at  Ploudiry  within the arrondissement of  Brest  in  Brittany  in north-western  France . It comprises the church, ossuary and calvary. Much of the old church was demolished and replaced in the 18th Century and between 1853 and 1856 a major part of the church was rebuilt with designs by the architect Joseph Bigot. The main survivor of the old church was the south porch. Until the French Revolution, the parish of Ploudiry was the largest in the Léon region and embraced Loc-Eguiner, Ploudiry, La Martyre, La Roche-Maurice and Saint Julien de Landerneau. It was one of the areas in the  Élorn valley  to be enriched by participation in the linen trade and much of this wealth was invested in the church and enlargement of the church building. [1]

The existing tower dates to 1854, the original tower collapsing in 1850. A general lack of funds meant that the new tower was much smaller than the earlier tower and limited to one gallery. [1]

Built in 1665 in the  Renaissance  style and in a mixture of the yellow Logonna stone and Kersanton. The entrance arcade mountings and  voissoir  are decorated with figures from the  Old Testament  and the  Passion  of Jesus Christ, including prophets and church teachers. There is a Kersanton statue of  Saint Sebastian  in a  niche  on the right side  buttress .The porch at Ploudiry is much lauded and resembles those at  Pencran  and at  Guimiliau  although, being built in 1685, is much older. At the base of the arcade and in the "piédroits" ( the individual bricks of the pillars supporting the arch) are six scenes inspired by the book of  Genesis  and the story of  Adam and Eve . In the first piédroit at the base of the left hand pillar, Adam and Eve appear in a scene depicting their temptation in Paradise. We see the tree and the snake. The snake has a human head whilst the body is reptilian and wraps itself around part of the piédroit. Eve is reaching towards the forbidden fruit. If we then move to the first piédroit at the base of the right hand pillar, we see the result of Eve's failure to resist the temptation. Now Adam and Eve are expelled from Eden. They attempt to cover their pubic areas with a flower and their other arms rest on their chests. Above Eve an angel shakes her fist in anger. Now we move back to the left and the second piédroit. Eve is now shown as a mother holding a baby and Adam works in the field whilst Cain and Abel make their offerings/sacrifice. Back then to the right side and we see Cain shielding his eye whilst his brother kneels in prayer. If we then return to the third piédroit on the left, we see Abel in his death throws whilst his brother, full of regrets, turns towards a small depiction of God who is most unhappy. The final third piédroit on the right depicts Noah harvesting his grapes and then, having drunk well, we see Noah clearly intoxicated, whilst Cham tries to cover his father's nudity by drawing together his cloak and another, either  Sem  or  Japhet , struggles to hold Cham back. We then have a sort of sculptural full stop between the final piédroits and voussures. Then in the voussures leading to the  keystone  we have depictions of twelve people led by four prophets,  Daniel ,  Jeremiah ,  Isiah  and  Ezekiel . Then come the four eastern doctors, Jean Chrysostome, Grégoire de Naziance, Athanase and Saint Basil and the four western doctors,  Saint Augustine ,  Saint Jerome ,  Saint Gregory  and  Saint Ambrose . In the voussures after the keystone are twelve monks and nuns carrying the  instruments of the passion . They hold one instrument in each hand so we see the whip and column of the flagellation, the cross and the nails, Malchus' ear on Saint Peter's knife and his lantern, the crown of thorns and the roseau from the "Ecce Homo" scene, the bowl used by Pilate to wash his hands, the tools and the ladder used to bring the body down from the cross, Veronica's veil, the lance of the transfixion and the hammer, the sponge and Judas' thirty pieces of silver. The final two figures hold the long bars used to push the crown of thorns down onto Jesus' head. In the porch interior are twelve empty niches. [2] [3]

Piédroits on the left side of the entrance to the south porch at Ploudiry

Piédroits on the right side of the entrance to the south porch at Ploudiry

Sculptures in the voussure of the entrance to the south porch at Ploudiry. On the right is Daniel and on the left Isaiah. We see the heads below of Jeremiah and Ezekiel.

Saint Sebastian

Decoration on the porch

Decoration on the porch

Empty niches in the porch interior

This dates to the 16th/18th Century and comprises three panels depicting the  Nativity  on the left, two shepherds in the centre and the visit of the  Magi  in the right panel. The  tabernacle  has niches containing depictions of the four  Evangelists  and its panels depict scenes from the life of the Holy Family and the  Annunciation . [1] [4]

The main altar

Part of main altar

Part of main altar

Part of main altar

This is located on the north side of the church and came from the church at  La Martyre  in 1793. Six columns divide the altarpiece into three sections and niches hold statues of Saint Guillaume and  Saint Francis of Assisi . Further niches a little higher up contain images of a female saint and an " Ecce Homo ". At the front,  Saint Anne  is shown teaching the  Virgin Mary  to read and smaller niches hold images of  Saint Peter  and  Saint Paul  and the whole composition is crowned by a statue of the crowned Christ. [1]

This altarpiece came from the old church where it had been located in the "Rosary" chapel (Chapelle du Rosaire). It dates to 1644. In side niches are statues of  Saint Dominic  and  Catherine of Sienna  and in the altarpiece painting we see these saints receiving the rosary from the Virgin Mary and Jesus. Under the altarpiece's niches are two panels depicting Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Beneath the painting, a garland contains the traditional fifteen medallions associated with the mysteries of the rosary (five of joy, five of sadness and five glory). Above the front of the altarpiece there is a composition involving the Virgin Mary and her child. The stained glass in the abside depicts the  passion  and dates from the early 16th Century. [1]

The main window behind the altar came from the old church and depicts the crucifixion, with Christ on the cross and the two robbers on crosses nearby. Mary Magdalene is placed at the foot of the cross. Near to the good robber are some female saints and the disciples along with the soldier who would pierce Christ's side with a spear. On the other side we see the High Priest and various other people. At the base of the window, and obscured by the altar, are scenes of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane, the Last Supper and Jesus' arrest. On each side of this window are statues of Saint Peter and the Virgin Mary with child. The two side windows are modern, date to 1957 and are signed "Guével". The left side window shows scenes from Saint Peter's life and the second scenes from the life of the Virgin Mary. [4]

The pulpit has five panels with palm leaves and flowers decorating the stairway and is itself decorated with three bas-reliefs. In one the risen Christ is seen on a cloud handing the keys of heaven to Saint Peter. Saint Peter is of course the church's patron saint. In the central relief, Christ is shown in discussion with the lawyers and in the third relief, Saint Peter appears again. Above the pulpit there is a dove and at the top of the  sounding board  there is a carving of the papal crown and Saint Peter's keys. Facing the pulpit is a statue of Christ on the cross and a highly regarded  pietà .  [1] [4]

A rectangular building, it has been listed since 1916. It is called the Saint Joseph chapel. Dates to 1635 and restored in 1731. The door has a Greek style front with a  tympanum  containing a bust of Saint Peter. To the left of the door are five bays separated by doric  pilasters . Above a frieze is a depiction of the  danse macabre  featuring a labourer, a noblewoman, and judge and a warrior, all equal before the "Ankou" or death. Over the ossuary stoup, an angel carries a banner reading "Bones gente qui par icy passez Priez Dieu les Trépassez 1635", a request to the passerby to respect the dead. Interesting to note that a royal decree was passed in the early 18th Century which effectively stopped the use of ossuaries. Thereafter many such buildings were used as chapels, some as schools and many are now small museums. [1] [4]

The Ploudiry ossuary

An angel with banner above the stoup

The Ankou

Other depictions in the ossuary frieze.

Saint Peter with key in the ossuary tympanum

The five windows with frieze above.

This stands in the cemetery on the north side of the enclos and carries two dates, "1633" and "1868"  [1] [5]

There some interesting sculptures decorating the north entrance. Possible they come from another calvary in the area.

Pietà. One of the sculptures decorating the north entrance

A saint. One of the sculptures decorating the north entrance

Jesus crucified. One of the sculptures decorating the north entrance