Prison Legal News  (PLN)  is a monthly  American   magazine  and on-line periodical published since May 1990.  Prison Legal News  (PLN) primarily reports on criminal justice issues and prison and jail-related civil litigation, mainly in the United States. It is a project of the  Human Rights Defense Center  (HRDC), a  501(c)(3)  non-profit organization. [1]

Prison Legal News  is the longest running newspaper produced by and for current and former prisoners in U.S history. [2]

PLN covers all aspects of the criminal justice system, including court access, prison conditions, privatization, disciplinary hearings, excessive force, mail censorship, jails, wrongful convictions, crime labs, visitation, prison phone services, immigration detention, religious freedom, free speech, prison rape, abuse of women prisoners, retaliation, the  Prison Litigation Reform Act  (PLRA), medical treatment,  HIV and hepatitis C ,  prison slave labor , disenfranchisement, the death penalty and control units/supermax facilities. However, the mainstay of PLN’s coverage from the beginning has been the issue of conditions of confinement. [3]

Prison Legal News  was inspired by the need for prisoners and their families to have a voice in criminal justice policy and to provide timely, accurate news about justice-related issues and progressive reform efforts. PLN has been admired and disliked for its strong advocacy of prisoner rights, including its extensive litigation involving jails and prison systems.

As of February 2017, PLN had an average circulation of over 9,000 hardcopy issues per month. About 70% of PLN's subscribers are state and federal prisoners, and PLN has incarcerated subscribers in all fifty states [4] . Based on PLN's media pack, each subscriber's magazine is read by an average of almost 10 people, so PLN’s monthly readership is around 90,000 [5] . As of February 2017, subscriptions were $30/year for prisoners, $35/year for non-incarcerated individuals and $90/year for attorneys, government agencies and corporations.

The PLN website has over 18,000 news and law articles in its database. [6]  The publication section has more than 5,600 reports, audits and other documents related to criminal justice topics, and the brief bank contains over 7,500 assorted legal pleadings - including complaints, motions, appeal briefs, verdicts, judgments and settlements in prison and jail cases. [7]  The site receives over 150,000 visitors each month and also functions as a resource for media and community outreach as well as a platform for public education on criminal justice issues. [8]  A website subscription is $149.95/year and gives full access to all of PLN's online content.

Prison Legal News  also publishes and distributes legal reference and self-help educational books [9] , ranging from their own in-house-published  The Habeas Citebook: Ineffective Assistance of Counsel  by Brandon Sample [10]  and the  Prisoner Education Guide by  Christopher Zoukis, [11]  to the Nolo legal how-to series and the  Prisoners’ Self-Help Litigation Manual [12] . PLN also distributes (free upon request) the  Prisoner Diabetes Handbook , and is the exclusive distributor of  Protecting Your Health & Safety: A Litigation Guide for Inmates , a book published by the  Southern Poverty Law Center . [13]

In addition to the monthly magazine and website, PLN has published three anthologies related to mass incarceration:  The Celling of America: An Inside Look at the U.S Prison Industry  (Common Courage Press, 1997);  Prison Nation: The Warehousing of America's Poor (Routledge)  (2003); and  Prison Profiteers: Who makes Money from Mass Imprisonment  (2008). [14]

PLN  has been involved in litigation concerning First Amendment and censorship issues in the prison and jail context since 1994. Co-editor Ed Mead was prevented from assisting in publishing  Prison Legal News  due to a condition of his parole prohibiting association with other felons – a policy specifically enacted to prevent Mead from further involvement with PLN. [15]

In 1997, PLN, represented by the ACLU of Washington, joined with other publishers and prisoner plaintiffs in a suit challenging the state of Washington DOC’s wide-ranging censorship of incoming mail, publications and mail classifications, among other issues. The lawsuit was settled in 2000, with the state agreeing to change its censorship policies and pay the plaintiffs’ attorney fees and costs. [16]

Prison Legal News  obtained a  preliminary injunction  against the Nevada DOC’s statewide ban on PLN, followed by a consent decree in which the DOC agreed to pay damages and change its policies concerning mail and publications. The matter was settled in September 2000. [17]

The  Supermax ADX prison , run by the federal Bureau of Prisons, enacted a policy banning all books related to prisons and prisoners. PLN filed suit in 2003 and withdrew the lawsuit in 2005 after the ADX mooted the claim by changing its unconstitutional policy. [18]

In 2006,  PLN  and the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) settled the magazine’s claims that CDCR mail policies violated a number of federal and state rights, under precedents established by  PLN.  As a result of the settlement, CDCR ordered five-year subscriptions to  PLN  for all of its facilities and is being monitored by  PLN  for compliance. [19]

In 2012, PLN settled with the State of New York, reversing a statewide ban on the magazine in New York prisons. [20]  That year, it also settled with  Berkeley County, South Carolina , reaching the largest ever jail-related censorship settlement in the United States, totaling almost $600,000 in damages and attorney fees. [21]  The U.S.  Department of Justice  joined PLN in its lawsuit against the unconstitutional mail policies enacted by Berkeley County. [22]

In 2015, PLN settled a case with the U.S Department of Homeland Security after PLN filed a FOIA request for records related to telephone services and other documents concerning the ability of immigration prisoners to communicate with people outside the Northwest Detention Center in  Tacoma, Washington ; this is operated by the  GEO Corporation , a private for-profit company. [23]

In addition to battling unconstitutional censorship through litigation (see the May 2010 issue of PLN for a full listing of cases), [24]   Prison Legal News  has also filed numerous lawsuits related to public records and  Freedom of Information Act  requests in order to pursue its investigative reporting on detention facility issues.

These cases have led to landmark rulings. including  PLN v. Washington Department of Corrections , 115 P.3d 316 (Wash. 2005). At the time it was the largest penalty and attorney fee payout in a Washington state public records case in history and disclosed serious misconduct among Washington prison doctors.

Founded as Prisoners Legal News, in 2009 PLN’s parent organization was renamed as the Human Rights Defense Center. It is a non-profit organization dedicated to protecting the human rights of people held in U.S. detention facilities. HRDC also supports  Prison Legal News  in national campaigns in coordination with other advocacy groups 1) to lower prison phone rates; [25]  2) to demand transparency and accountability of private prison contractors, [26]  and with numerous other activities related to the human rights of prisoners.

PLN’s editor and managing editor are former prisoners. The magazine features contributions from nationally recognized scholars and activists involved in criminal justice reform or advocacy efforts. Contributors include  Mumia Abu Jamal , [27]   Noam Chomsky , [28]  Marie Gottschalk, [29]  Prison Policy Initiative Director Peter Wagner, [30]  Prison Law Office Director Donald Specter [31]  and ACLU National Prison Project Director David Fathi, [32]  and  Christopher Zoukis , founder of PrisonEducation.com and PrisonLawBlog.com. [33]  The bulk of PLN’s content is written by current and former prisoners. As of 2017,  Prison Legal News  has published continuously for 27 years.