Pyotr Nikolayevich Nesterov  ( Russian :  Пётр Николаевич Нестеров  (born 27 February [ O.S.  15 February] 1887,  Nizhny Novgorod  - died 8 September [ O.S.  26 August] 1914,  Zhovkva ,  Lviv Oblast ) was a  Russian  pilot, an aircraft designer and an  aerobatics  pioneer.

Nesterov was born on 15 February 1887 in Nizhny Novgorod, into the family of an army officer, a cadet corps teacher. In August 1904, he left the military school in Nizhny Novgorod and went to Mikhailov artillery academy in St Petersburg, [1]  He became a  second lieutenant  and served in the 9th East Siberian  Artillery   Brigade  in  Vladivostok . By the laws of that time, an officer who married before the age of 28 had to contribute a so-called ‘reserve’ to the state treasury – a deposit of 5,000  rubles  to provide for his family in the event of his death. The only exception was made for officers who served in the Far East; as Nesterov did not have the money, he took his young wife to the Far East. [1]

In 1909, Nesterov came into contact with  aviation  when he was posted to a balloon observation regiment as an observer. [2]  In 1911 He built his first  glider  and learned to fly it, before entering flight training at the St. Petersburg aviation school at Gatchina in June, graduating 11 October 1912. [2]  A short time later he also passed the examination to be a military pilot. In May 1913 he became leader of an aviation detachment in Kiev, completing night flights at that time.

Nesterov believed an aircraft could fly a  loop , a feat not previously performed. Despite the doubts of his peers, Nesterov proved his theory on 9 September 1913 (27 August by the calendar then used in Russia) and became the first pilot to fly a loop. [3]  This was done in a  Nieuport IV   monoplane  over Syretzk Aerodrome near  Kiev , before many watchers. [1]  For this he was disciplined with ten days of close arrest, ostensibly "for risking government property". His achievement made him famous overnight and when the feat was officially done by the famous French pilot  Adolphe Pégoud , the punishment was reversed; he was promoted to staff captain and later awarded a medal. Stressing the value of these exercises for a military pilot, Nesterov improved Russian flight methods through extensive training, both with cross country flights and steep turns, and designed a vee tail for the Nieuport he was flying although its performance proved disappointing. [4]

Aircraft were still unarmed at this early stage, and Nesterov became the first pilot to destroy an enemy airplane in flight. On 25 August 1914 (by the  Old Style  calendar still used in Russia), after trying various methods on previous occasions unsuccessfully, he used his  Morane-Saulnier Type G  (s/n 281) to  ram  the  Austrian   Albatros B.II  reconnaissance aircraft of observer  Baron  Friedrich von Rosenthal and pilot Franz Malina from FLIK 11. [5]  Eager to destroy enemy aircraft, he probably intended to hit it with a glancing blow but damaged his own aircraft as much as the enemy's and both planes crashed. As was common for the time, Nesterov was not strapped in and he fell from his plane, dying of his injuries the next day. [6]  The Austrian pilot and observer also died. The town of  Zhovkva  (currently in  Lviv Oblast ,  Ukraine ), located near the battle, was renamed Nesterov in 1951.

Nesterov was buried in  Kiev , Russian Empire. His ramming method was used during the  Second World War  by a number of  Soviet  pilots with success and without loss of life. The technique became known as  taran . In his honor, the Soviet Union established the  Nesterov Cup  for the best aerobatics team. The cup was donated to the  Fédération Aéronautique Internationale  (FIA) in 1962. It is awarded to the Men's World Team Champions of the World Aerobatic Championships. [7]

The  outer main-belt   asteroid   3071 Nesterov , discovered by  Soviet  astronomer  Tamara Mikhailovna Smirnova  in 1973, is named after him. [8]