Rana Sanaullah Khan  ( Urdu :  رانا ثناء اللہ خان ‎) is a  Pakistani   politician  and government minister. He was born in  Faisalabad  and was first elected to the  Provincial Assembly of the Punjab  in 1990 and served as Deputy Leader of the Opposition in that Assembly. Leaving office in 1993, he returned there for the 2 terms for the years 1997–1999 and 2002–2007. During the latter term, he once again acted as Deputy Opposition Leader and also as Parliamentary Leader for the  Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz) . [2]  Rana Sanaullah Khan is a cousin of former  Chief Justice of Pakistan   Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry . [1]

Elected for a fourth term, and appointed as Minister for Law, Parliamentary Affairs and Public Prosecution, he has a legal background as an Advocate in the  Supreme Court of Pakistan  and claims to have been imprisoned on account of his principles. [2]

In August 2011, he accused American  Warren Weinstein  of being an American spy although Weinstein had lived in Pakistan for seven years and there was no evidence that he was a spy. Weinstein went missing a week later and has not been heard from since. [3]

On 17 June 2014, Punjab Police raided the  Minhaj-ul-Quran International 's lahore secretariat on the pretext of removing security barriers from its surroundings.  Tahir-ul-Qadri 's followers, who were preparing for his arrival from Canada to launch an anti-government movement on 23 June 2014, protested and deadly skirmishes started. A dozen of Tahir-ul-Qadri's devotees were killed including three women and around hundred got seriously wounded from bullet shots. [4] [5] [6]  Rana Sanaullah, who is considered only second to the Chief Minister, remained adamant that the police action was justified which added to the public fury. [7]

In the wake of public reaction and opposition's criticism,  Shahbaz Sharif  sacked Rana Sanaullah Khan as law minister, and  Punjab 's top bureaucrat. [8]  However, Qadri and other opposition leaders including  Imran Khan  held  Shahbaz Sharif , Chief Minister of Punjab, responsible for the civilian deaths at the hands of police and demanded his resignation. [9]  FIR of Model Town tragedy was registered against key figures of the present government including the Prime Minister, the Chief Minister and Rana Sanaullah Khan. [10]

A joint-investigation-team (JIT) was formed to investigate the incident. Once that JIT cleared him from charges, he was sworn in as Punjab Law Minister again in May 2015. [11]