Redonda Beach  or  Praia Redonda  in  Portuguese , meaning Round, is a beach on the southwestern coast of  Póvoa de Varzim ,  Portugal , bordering the  Atlantic Ocean . It is adjacent to  Passeio Alegre , in  Póvoa de Varzim City Center . The  Avenida dos Banhos  runs alongside the beach, and the  Diana Bar beach library , a nightclub and Café Guarda-sol are located on the beach.

The beach has medium sand and little granitic gneiss, typical rocky outcrops on Póvoa de Varzim coastline, the largest concentration is Carvalhido outcrop, which serves as the north limit of the beach.  Salgueira Beach  is located to the North and the  Port of Póvoa de Varzim  to the south. These beaches have a specific climate, by showing low  diurnal temperature variation , just 4 °C (39.2 °F). [1]  Compared with the rest of the territory, rainfall is significantly lower and  solar irradiation  higher. [2] [3]  These are subject to the  prevailing northern winds  which arise in the summer after midday, hence mornings are significantly less windy. [4]

The beach is historically known as  Praia de Banhos , Portuguese for Bathing Beach, contrasting with the Fisheries Beach (used for fishing and with very fine sand), currently the  Port of Póvoa de Varzim . it it the historical bathing beach of Póvoa de Varzim, that in the 19th century became the most popular tourist destination in Northern Portugal.  Ramalho Ortigão , in the book  As Praias de Portugal  (The Beaches of Portugal), states that Póvoa de Varzim is the great hostel for the inhabitants of the Minho province, for  sea bathing  or breathing the  Sea air , as the  marine layer  is occasionally propelled to the beach by the south and western maritime winds during summertime, leaving an intense aroma. Ortigão states that in that time no other beach had such diversity and popularity. [5] [6]

In 1844, the chapel of Saint Joseph was built in there, and there was a street known as rua da Areosa. The street was enlarged and became the Passeio Alegre square and the chapel demolished by beautification of the beaches square. A new chapel was built in Avenida Mousinho de Albuquerque to replace it. [6]  However, in the 1930s, beach bars were constructed in the location of the chappel: Diana Bar and Café Guardassol, the later was, at first, a famed 1920's wooden building, causing local debate. In the 1970s, Café Enseada was built and, in the 21st century, a new wooden building, the Maresia Café.

Coordinates :  41°22′45.6″N   8°46′8.9″W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.379333°N 8.769139°W ﻿ /  41.379333; -8.769139