Reds United Football Club  was an  Irish association football club , originally formed in  Ringsend ,  Dublin . Reds United were active in the mid–1930s and played in the  Leinster Senior League , the  League of Ireland  and the  FAI Cup . The club was formed by former members of  Shelbourne  after the latter club was suspended from the League of Ireland at the end of the  1933–34  season. Reds United played just one season, 1935–36 , in the League of Ireland. Together with  YMCA ,  Frankfort  and  Rathmines Athletic , they are one of only four clubs to have played just one season in the top level of the  League of Ireland . [1]

In early 1934,  Shelbourne  were fined by the  Football Association of Ireland  for allegedly poaching players from nearby clubs. When Shelbourne refused to pay the fine they were threatened with suspension. In March 1934 Shelbourne informed the FAI by letter that they had applied for membership of the  Irish Football Association . They also withdrew from the  League of Ireland Shield . At the time the relationship between the two rival Irish national associations was at an all-time low. In June 1934 the FAI responded by suspending Shelbourne for one year. They also banned members of the club's management committee from managing any other club affiliated to the FAI. Shelbourne were banned from the  League of Ireland  and their place was awarded to  Waterford . [2] [3]

With  Shelbourne  now suspended from any footballing activity a number of former Shelbourne members and players based in  Ringsend  got together, formed a new club, Reds United and successfully applied to join the  Leinster Senior League . In 1934–35, with a team that included  John Joe Flood , Reds United finished as Leinster Senior League champions and, together with  Brideville , were subsequently elected to the  1935–36 League of Ireland . Reds United also competed in the  1934–35 FAI Cup . In the first round they drew 3–3 with  Bohemians  but lost the replay 4–3. [4]

Reds United made their  League of Ireland  debut with a 2-0 win at  The Mardyke  against  Cork . [5]  With a team that included  Willie Ouchterlonie  and Tommy "Netler" Doyle, an ex- Shamrock Rovers  player, they finished the  1935–36  season in a respectable fourth place, behind  Bohemians ,  Dolphin  and  Cork . Reds United were also quarter-finalists in the  1935–36 FAI Cup . At the end of the 1935–36 season, however, they resigned their place in the league to make way for a returning  Shelbourne . Having completed their one-year ban Shelbourne, had spent the 1935–36 season playing in the  Athletic Union League . With the support of Shamrock Rovers, they had also managed to successfully appeal their ban from the League of Ireland. [6] [7] [8] [9]   [3] [10]

There is some evidence to suggest that after leaving the  League of Ireland , Reds United may have continued to function as a junior club in some capacity. Two  Shamrock Rovers  players active in the mid-1940s,  Tommy Godwin   [11]  and Ossie Nash played junior football with a Reds United.

Reds United played their home  League of Ireland  games at  Glenmalure Park , the home of  Shamrock Rovers . However they played their home games against Rovers at  Dalymount Park . [12]

The following Reds United players represented  Ireland  at full international level.