Source: German railway atlas [1]

The  Chemnitz–Riesa railway  is a two-track and electrified mainline railway in the  German state  of  Saxony , originally built and operated by the  Chemnitz-Riesa Railway Company . The line was opened between 1847 and 1852 and is one of the  oldest railways in Germany . The line runs from  Riesa  via  Döbeln  to  Chemnitz  and is part of the  Berlin –Chemnitz route.

In 1837, plans were submitted for a rail link from Riesa, a major freight hub on the  Elbe  river, to Chemnitz and on to  Zwickau , which was significant as a coal producing region. After the  Leipzig–Dresden railway  was opened, connecting the industrial city of Chemnitz to Leipzig and Dresden, even if it involved a detour via Riesa, was given the highest priority. On 9 May 1845 construction started and progressed rapidly on the northern section from Riesa to Döbeln. The line was officially opened on 29 August 1847 and on 22 September 1847 it was extended a short distance to  Limmritz . Döbeln initially only had a station in the northern district of Großbauchlitz. The current  Döbeln Hauptbahnhof  was only opened in its present position after the completion of the  Dresden–Döbeln–Leipzig line  in 1868.

Construction of the section from Limmritz to  Waldheim  presented major problems. Although work began in 1845, the cost of building viaducts, retaining walls and earthworks in the  Zschopau  valley quickly put the company into financial distress. Already in 1845 strikes began to occur due to the lack of payment of wages to workers; the  revolution of 1848  further complicated construction. As of the line could not be operated profitable without a continuous line to Chemnitz and a loan could not be raised, the  Chemnitz-Riesa Railway Company  ( German :  Chemnitz-Riesaer Eisenbahn-Gesellschaft ) asked to be taken over by the state in 1848. This took place on 31 December 1850 and the company continued construction, so that finally, on 1 September 1852, the whole line could be opened. Even now, the Limmritz–Waldheim section is known as the  Bankrottmeile  ("bankruptcy mile"; note that the  northern German mile  was 7532.5 metres long).

A  line from Chemnitz to Zwickau  was opened as planned by the  Erzgebirge Railway Company  ( Erzgebirgischen Eisenbahn-Gesellschaft ) in 1858 (with  a branch  extending from  Glauchau  to  Gößnitz ); as a result the line became known as the  Lower  Erzgebirge  State Railway  ( Niedererzgebirgischen Staatsbahn ). The line now connected not only to the  Saxon-Bavarian State Railway  ( Sächsisch-Baiersche Eisenbahn-Compagnie ), but also to the  Upper Erzgebirge State Railway  ( Obererzgebirgischen Staatsbahn ) between Zwickau and  Schwarzenberg, Saxony , which also opened in 1858. On 1 January 1859 these lines were named the  Western State Railways  ( Westlichen Staatsbahn ).

In the  Austro-Prussian War  of 1866, the  Ostrau  viaduct was demolished by  Prussian   pioneers .  Großbauchlitz  ( Döbeln Nord  since 1932) station was connected in 1905 by a 1 km-long  trolleybus -like system for freight from Günther’s flour mill; it was replaced in 1914 by a siding. The biggest turning point in the line’s history occurred after 1945.  Reparations  to the  Soviet Union  led to the complete dismantling of the second track, which made operating during the next 45 years very difficult on this heavily trafficked mainline route. The second track was restored to operations only in 1990. Prior to the electrification of 1991, the roofs of two "artificial" tunnels (which were built in the early years of the line to avoid rock falls and snow drifts) were removed.

In Riesa station the line branches off along with the branch line to  Nossen  from the  Leipzig–Dresden line . The  line to Nossen  branches off the left and runs to the south, while the Chemnitz line runs to the south-west and passes over highway B 169. The northern section runs through relatively flat land until the Döbeln area; the only significant engineering works on this section is the 130 m-long viaduct near Ostrava and the 80 m-long bridge over the  Mulde  outside Döbeln station. Near the Döbeln-Nord motorway junction, it crosses the  A 14 , and after crossing the  Freiberger Mulde  it runs to the now single-track and non-electrified  main line  from  Coswig  via  Borsdorf  to  Leipzig . Döbeln Hauptbahnhof is built at the junction of two lines as a  V-shaped station . The station building is located between the tracks from Riesa and  Meissen .

South of Döbeln Hauptbahnhof, the Borsdorf–Coswig line branches off to the west and the line then crosses highways B 169 and B 175. The line enters the valley of the Zschopau near Limmritz. The section from Limmritz to Waldheim has the greatest concentration of engineering works on the entire route. Since as a result of the construction of this section, the Chemnitz-Riesa railway company went bankrupt and had to be taken over by the state, it is commonly known even today as the "bankruptcy mile". The line crosses the 14 arches of the 270 m-long and 32-m high Limmritz viaduct over the Zschopau. Immediately afterwards it used to pass through the 128 m-long Saalbach tunnel, which had its roof removed in 1991 in preparations for the line’s electrification. The line then follows a steep and rocky slope along the left bank of the river, which it crosses on the 49 m-high, 210 m-long Diedenmühle Bridge over Steinaer Bach (stream), which here flows in a deep valley to the Zschopau. In Waldheim station, the disused line from  Rochlitz  branched off to the west until its closure in 1997.

South of Waldheim station the line used to run through the 170-metre-long Pfaffenberg tunnel, which was also had its roof removed prior to the electrification of the line. The line then crosses the Zschopau again on the 41 m-high and 211 m-long Heiligenborn viaduct. East of the viaduct is a 28 m-high and 165 m-long steel girder bridge of the abandoned freight railway to Kriebethal near  Kriebstein . The Chemnitz line turns slightly toward the southwest, away from the Kriebstein line (which runs on a more southerly course) and the Zschopau to reach its westernmost point just before Eger. It then runs fairly directly to the south to  Mittweida ,  Altmittweida  and  Oberlichtenau , where it crosses the  A 4 . This bridge was replaced completely as part of the upgrade of the A 4 at the end of the 1990s to six lanes. On its way to its southern end at  Chemnitz Hauptbahnhof , the line is joined by the  Dresden–Werdau line  from the east and the  line from Leipzig  from the west.

A  Regionalbahn  service (RB 45) runs on the  Elsterwerda –Riesa–Chemnitz hourly. It used to be operated by  DB Regio  until mid-June 2016 mainly with  class 143 locomotives , hauling two double-deck carriages. Since 12 June 2016 those services are operated by  Mitteldeutsche Regiobahn  with  Alstom Coradia Continental  electric multiple units. Additional suburban services are run between Mittweida and Chemnitz by  City-Bahn Chemnitz .

There are also freight transport on the line, particularly coal trains to Chemnitz and  Mitteldeutsche Eisenbahn  tanker trains on the section between Riesa and Döbeln Hauptbahnhof.