The  Robert A. Millikan House  is a historic house at 5605 South Woodlawn Avenue in  Hyde Park   community area  of  Chicago ,  Illinois , Built about 1907, it was from about 1908 until 1921 the home of American  physicist   Robert A. Millikan  (1868-1953), the period in which he made his most significant  Nobel Prize  winning work. The three-story brick building earned  National Historic Landmark  status on May 11, 1976. [3]

The Robert A. Millikan House stands in Chicago's South Side Hyde Park neighorhood, northeast of the  University of Chicago  campus at the southeast corner of South Woodlawn Avenue and East 56th Street. It is one of a sequence of three adjacent houses designed by the Chicago firm  Tallmadge & Watson  and built about 1907. It is three stories in height, with a mainly brick exterior. It has a broad profile in the Prairie style, with slightly projecting broad gabled sections near the ends, and a narrower off-center entrance projecting. The full third level, and the second level of the entrance section, are finished in Tudor-style half timbering. Window placement and size are somewhat irregular. The building interior is relatively plain. [4]

Robert Millikan, an Illinois native who received the first Ph.D in physics from  Columbia University , moved into this house about 1907. He was at the time serving as a professor and researcher in the University of Chicago physics department. It is there that he organized and performed his famous  oil-drop experiment , which provided the most accurate measure of the time of the electrical charge of an  electron . He also established experimental apparatus that was used to confirm the  photoelectric effect  postulated by  Albert Einstein  in 1905. For these works Millikan was awarded the 1923  Nobel Prize in Physics . Millikan was seen then as one of the leaders of growing American dominance in his field. [4]

Millikan moved out of this house in 1921, when he took a position at what is now the  California Institute of Technology . [4]  The house remains a private residence.