Rush Valley  is a 30-mile (48 km) long [1]  north-trending valley in the southeast of  Tooele County ,  Utah . [2]  It lies adjacent and attached at the south of  Tooele Valley ; the separation point is the lowpoint of the valley at  Rush Lake , and lies at the southeast of the small mountain  massif  causing the separation, South Mountain at 6,541 feet (1,994 m). The region of Rush Lake is a marsh region, fed by various streams from the mountain regions east and west.

A southern section of the  Tooele Army Depot  lies in the valley's center-northeast, at the southwest foothills of the  Oquirrh Mountains .

Rush Valley narrows to about 7 miles (11 km) wide [3]  in the north, between the  Stansbury Mountains  west, and the Oquirrh Mountains east. The valley widens in the south, making two sections, a due-south section and a region to the southeast. The southern section contains the communities of  Vernon  and  Faust , with Faust north, closer to the valley's center-south. Vernon is in flatlands fed by the  Sheeprock Mountains  or foothills, southwest, south and southeast.

The southeast valley section is 16 miles (26 km) long [4]  from the Rush Valley center, and lies at the northwest of the East Tintic Mountains. A ridge north separates Rush Valley from Cedar Valley to the east.  Lofgreen  is in mountain foothills southwest, and  Pehrson  with  Topliff  are in lower elevation regions.

The two southern sections cover a width of about 15 miles (24 km), south of the valley center. The Rush Valley centerpoint is north of  Faust , and the small James Walter Fitzgerald Wildlife Management Area.

Utah State Route 36  (SR-36) transects the center of the valley, starting from a section at the northeast, from  Tooele  and  Stockton . It turns and leaves the valley's southeast to meet the region of  Eureka  and  Silver City  in the  East Tintic Mountains .

Utah State Route 73  (SR-73) joins SR-36 at the valley's center, after traversing the south of the Oquirrh Mountains, in the valley's southeast, (the north perimeter of the southeast section).

Utah State Route 199  (SR-199) enters the valley center from  Dugway , and its canyon route through the west mountains is the dividing line between the  Stansbury Mountains  north, and the  Onaqui Mountains  south.

3 valley sequences (west-to-east) — 
 Skull Valley ,  Tooele Valley -north &  Rush Valley -south,  Cedar Valley -(southeast, and smallest valley, at  Lake Mountains , west border of  Utah Lake )

1852 Stansbury Map