Ryan John Miller  (born September 27, 1975) is an American college basketball coach and current assistant coach at TCU (Texas Christian University). He has been an assistant coach at UNLV, Auburn, New Mexico, Pepperdine and Memphis. He has coached under John Calipari, Steve Alford, Tony Barbee and Dave Rice over the course of his career.

Born in  Mitchell, South Dakota , Miller attended Mitchell High School and played for coach, Gary Munsen, and lead the Mitchell Kernels to the South Dakota State AA championship in 1994. Miller earned All-State honors in 1993 and repeated the honor in 1994. [1]

Miller and his family have made their mark within basketball circles in South Dakota and on a national level. Miller's father, Tom and uncles Chris and Alan were all stand-out players at  Dakota Wesleyan University  and Alan Miller is still the all-time leading scorer in South Dakota college basketball history. [2]  Miller's brothers are Jared Miller (former teammate at Northern State) and Mike Miller, two-time NBA Champion with the  Miami Heat  and currently plays for the  Denver Nuggets . Miller's cousin, Macy Miller (Alan's daughter) is currently the PG for the  South Dakota State University  women's basketball team where she has led the Jackrabbits to back-to-back Summit League tournament titles and NCAA Tournament appearances. [3]

Collegiately, Miller played at Northern State University in  Aberdeen, South Dakota  leading his team as captain in 1998 to a region championship, Elite 8 appearance and to a ranking as high as #3 in Division II nationally. That same year he was awarded NSIC (Conference) MVP and Region MVP. Overall, Miller was a two-time All-Conference award winner, All-Academic and All-American at Northern State as well. Following his college playing career Miller was named to the Northern State Hall of Fame in 2013. [4] [5]

After college, Miller played professionally as he was drafted into the CBA in 1999 and then played for the Fargo-Morehead Beez in the International Basketball League during the 1999 season. Following that Miller played in the Australian Basketball Association for two seasons winning a league championship and being named league MVP.

Miller's college coaching career began in 2003 at the University of Memphis as he was at the Tigers from 2003 to 2006, where he worked under current  University of Kentucky  coach  John Calipari . During the 2006–07 season Miller was an assistant coach at Pepperdine University and from 2007-2012 he was an Assistant Basketball Coach at the  University of New Mexico  under current UCLA Coach Steve Alford. Miller served as associate head coach at  Auburn University  from 2012-2014 working under Coach  Tony Barbee . Most recently 2014–2016, Miller was the associate head coach/assistant coach at UNLV. [6]

Currently, Miller is an assistant coach under Head Coach Jamie Dixon. [7]