Samuel Bailey  (5 July 1791 – 18 January 1870) was a British philosopher and writer. He was called the " Bentham  of  Hallamshire ". [1]

Bailey was born at  Sheffield  on 5 July 1791, the son of Joseph Bailey and Mary Eadon. His father was among the first of those Sheffield  merchants  who went to the United States to establish trade connections. After a few years in his father's business, he retired from all business concerns with an ample fortune, although he remained connected with the Sheffield Banking Company, of which he was a founder in 1831 and served as  chairman  for many years. [2] :78  Although an ardent liberal, he took little part in political affairs. On two occasions, he stood for Sheffield as a " philosophic radical " parliamentary candidate, but without success.

His life is for the most part a history of his numerous and varied publications. He died suddenly on 18 January 1870, leaving over £80,000 to the town  trustees  of Sheffield for public use.

His first work,  Essays on the Formation and Publication of Opinions , published anonymously in 1821, attracted more attention than any of his other writings. A sequel to it appeared in 1829,  Essays on the Pursuit of Truth . Between these two were  Questions in Political Economy, Politics, Morals, &c.  (1823), and a  Critical Dissertation on the Nature, Measure, and Causes of Value  (1825), directed against the opinions of  David Ricardo  and his school.

His next publications also were on economic or political subjects,  Rationale of Political Representation  (1835), and  Money and its Vicissitudes  (1837) and he has been regarded as one of the main theorists of  Free banking . [2] :79  About the same time, there also appeared some of his  pamphlets ,  Discussion of Parliamentary Reform ,  Right of Primogeniture Examined ,  Defence of Joint-Stock Banks . In 1842 appeared his  Review of  Berkeley 's Theory of Vision  which called forth rejoinders from  John Stuart Mill  in the  Westminster Review [3]  and from  James Frederick Ferrier  in  Blackwood's Magazine . [4]  Bailey replied to his critics in a  Letter to a Philosopher  (1843), &c.

In 1851 he published  Theory of Reasoning , a discussion of the nature of  inference , and an able criticism of the functions and value of the  syllogism . In 1852 he published  Discourses on Various Subjects ; and finally summed up his philosophic views in the  Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind  (three series, 1855, 1858,1863). The  Letters  contain a discussion of many of the principal problems in  psychology  and ethics. Bailey can hardly be classed as belonging either to the strictly  empirical  or to the  idealist  school, but his general tendency is towards the former. (1) In regard to method, he founds  psychology  entirely on  introspection . He thus, to a certain extent, agrees with the  Scottish School , but he differs from them in rejecting altogether the doctrine of  mental faculties . What have been designated faculties are, upon his view, merely classified facts or phenomena of  consciousness . He criticizes very severely the habitual use of  metaphorical  language in describing mental operations. (2) His doctrine of  perception , which is, in brief, that "the perception of external things through the organs of sense is a direct mental act or phenomenon of consciousness not susceptible of being resolved into anything else," [5]  and the reality of which can be neither proved nor disproved, is not worked out in detail, but is supported by elaborate and sometimes subtle criticisms of all other theories. (3) With regard to general and abstract  ideas  and general  propositions , his opinions are those of the  empirical school , but his analysis frequently puts the matter in a new light. (4) In the theory of  morals , Bailey is an advocate of  utilitarianism  (though he objects to the term "utility" as being narrow and, to the unthinking, of sordid content), and works out with great skill the steps in the formation of the "complex"  mental facts  involved in the recognition of  duty ,  obligation , right.

He bases all moral phenomena on five facts: (1) Man is susceptible to  pleasure  (and  pain ); (2) he likes (or dislikes) their causes; (3) he desires to reciprocate pleasure and pain received; (4) he expects such reciprocation from others; (5) he feels more or less sympathy with the same feelings in his fellows (cf.  Letters , 3rd series).

In 1845 he published  Maro  a poem in four  cantos  (85 pp., Longmans), containing a description of a young poet who printed 1000 copies of his first poem, of which only 10 were sold. He was a diligent student of  Shakespeare , and his last literary work was  On the Received Text of Shakespeare's Dramatic Writings and its Improvement  (1862).