Samuel Beníquez Méndez  (born 1971 in  San Juan, Puerto Rico ) is a Puerto Rican best known for being nominated for an  Emmy Award  in year 2012  [1]  and as a plaintiff in an adoption law case that rose to the  Puerto Rico Supreme Court . He is the plaintiff in a widely reported court case to enforce his  legitimacy  rights against his alleged biological father, the world leader of the Pentecostal  Congregación Mita ,  Teófilo Vargas Seín .

His story is the subject of the book  Tu Alto Precio... Mi Gran Valor - La Vida de Samuel Beniquez; el Hijo de Aarón  by Miguel Amadeus and Samuel Ortiz Ramos (2005). [2]  He has since built a successful career as a public relations agent and co-founder of AVFA LLC, as San Juan Public Relations and advertising firm. On March 11, 2013 at 7:50am,  Aarón  did the DNA test. The results of the DNA test showed a positive result of 99.99999 percent chance that Teofilo Vargas Sein is his biological father. The results were presented by Judge Arlene Sellés on March 25, 2013, in the Court of First Instance, Superior Chamber, San Juan, Puerto Rico. [3] [4]

Beniquez was adopted by his maternal uncle and aunt Félix Beníquez and Ada Méndez. In 2004, this decision was appealed to the Court of First Instance of Puerto Rico for fraud and vitiated consent, as were claimed Beniquez' natural mother always lived with him, so the adoption in the light of the law never existed. Later on Antonia married and left her aunt and uncle's home with Beníquez. [5]

Beniquez is an active member of the  Public Relations Society of America ; Public Relations Society of Puerto Rico;  Puerto Rico Manufacturers Association ; licensed by the Regulatory Board of Public Relations Professionals of Puerto Rico; Voting member of The  Latin Academy of Recording Arts & Sciences [ citation needed ]  and Voting member of The  National Academy of Recording Arts & Sciences , [ citation needed ]  Florida Chapter (Member Since 2002).

Beniquez is co-author and composer of songs such as "Histeria", "Dame de ti", "Inevitable", "Todo fue por", "Si a ti te gusta" as well as another 24 lyrics and musical pieces. In collaboration with Samuel Ortiz he produced the albums " Histeriha " and " Off Da' Hook " winning the Paoli Award for Best New Artist in 2002. Their achievements led them to become voting members of The Recording Academy and The Latin Recording Academy. Also, under the pseudonym of Miguel Amadeus he wrote the best seller book titled:  Tu Alto Precio... Mi Gran Valor  in 2004.

Beniquez and Samuel Ortiz were also managers of the famous Puerto Rican singer Celines and other artists that have toured Europe, United States and the Caribbean.