San Giorgio  is a late- Renaissance -style,  Roman Catholic  parish church located in  Casalbuttano ,  Province of Cremona , region of  Lombardy , Italy.

An aedicule-chapel at the site was present since the 12th-century; by the mid 15th century a church was present. By 16th century chapels were present in the church. In 1567, an adjacent cemetery was established.

In 1581 an organ by the Antenati family of Brescia was built and the church was consecrated in 1600. The belltower measuring 65 meters in height was erected in 1624 -1638. The facade was built by followers of  Giuseppe Dattero , but replaced in 1920 by  Cesare Nava .

Inside, the main altarpiece depicts a  St George and the Dragon  (1593) by  Marcantonio Mainardi . Other works, including the stucco  polyptych , near the altar (1759) are by  Giacomo Guerrini .

To the right of the entrances are a canvas depicting  St Catherine of Alexandria  (1612) by  Andrea Mainardi , transferred to this church from the Franciscan church of San Salvatore in 1945; a  Madonna in Gloria  (first half of 17th-century) a copy of  Giulio Campi 's main altarpiece at  San Sigismondo  of Cremona, copy attributed to  Stefano Lambri ;  Marriage of the Virgin  by  Carlo Landriani ; a  Madonna of the Rosary with Sts Dominic and Catherine  Domenico e Santa Caterina (1652) by  Luigi Miradori ; and a  St Stephen with Sts Bernard and Bernardino  (1628) by  Marcantonio Mainardi , derived from the Franciscan Convent of San Salvatore.

Over the door at the end of the right nave is a painting of  L’Addolorata  by  Marcantonio Ghislina .

In the chapel on the left are a number of oil paintings, including one depicting  St Carlo Borromeo granting communion to those afflicted with the Plague  (1840) by  Carlo Landriani ; a  Crucifixion with Saints Francis, Antony, and Bernardino of Siena  (17th-century) attributed to  Ermenegildo Lambri ; a  Flight to Egypt , copy of a canvas by  Alessandro Turchi ; an  Annunciation  attributed to  Ermenegildo Lodi ; and a  Baptism of Christ  (1874) by  Giuseppina Baccini .

In the chapel of the Grotto of Lourdes, is a canvas depicting  St Francis receiving Stigmata  (17th-century), once attributed to Europa Anguissola, also deriving from the church of the Convent of San Salvatore;  Death of St Francis Xavier  (17th-century); and a  Christ carrying Cross  (15th-century) attributed to  Filippo Mazzola . [1]