Shellharbour Anglican College  (or SAC as it's commonly referred to) is an Anglican school operated by the  Sydney Anglican Schools Corporation . It opened in 2004 and accommodates from kindergarten to year 12 in 2009. The college operates in new, mostly permanent buildings in a semi-rural setting off Shellharbour Road, Dunmore. [1]  The school is located on the outskirts of  Shellharbour City ,  New South Wales , Australia.

Shellharbour Anglican College currently has over 450 enrolments with the number of enrolments to rise as the school progresses with the building of the new modern classrooms. The school offers a wide range of classes as well as a large variety of co-curricular and academic activities with opportunities to serve fellow students and build character. [ citation needed ]

The college opened in 2004. The first day of school was held in a local church, due to the buildings being deemed by the Council to be not ready for occupation. The college opened at the site the following day and began operations. The college has since excelled each year with a new grade being added every year, reaching year 12 in 2009. From a simple beginning of 93 students, 10 staff members, and 2 buildings, to a current population of 740 students, 65 teachers, 11 buildings, and a recently completed Music/Drama/TAS. The college has been approved as an asthma friendly school, and upholds a healthy canteen scheme to better encourage healthy eating in the student population. The college holds a Christian community spirit helping both inside and outside the boundaries of the college, raising funds in the Red Cross door knock, and contributing to many charities through various events and special days. [ citation needed ]

Statistics show that on average students have performed better than the rest of the state in the school certificate, NAPLAN, ELLA, SNAP, and Basic Skills. [2]

The Motto was carefully selected, made to draw those who read it to unconsider the cross of Jesus again. "The Cross, historically, was an instrument of punishment and life death. It is 'In Christ Alone' that the cross becomes a symbol of new life, and hope. For those of the college community who claim a Christian faith we are acknowledging that 'In Christ Alone' we find forgiveness once and for all and the strength and wisdom that we need for daily living". The Motto was derived from the popular a Christian song, which is the official hymn of the college. [3]

The pastoral care program is structured through the following means to strive for the above ideals.

Each student is in a tutor group of 15–18 students with a tutor who is the main person responsible for their pastoral care. The Tutor Group meets regularly to enable the tutor to get to know each member of their group very well through a wide range of activities such as informal conversations, diary inspections, devotions, discussion of important issues, games, group celebrations and much more. In this way a tutor builds rapport with the members of their group and is able to guide them, correct them, and positively affirm them on a regular basis.

The Head of House has a special role in the area of pastoral care in looking after the welfare of the students in their House group. They provide an important channel of communication between the student and classroom teacher and home and school and also focus on the particular needs of the whole House group. [ citation needed ]

The College’s Outdoor Education Program continues to be developed with a very strong focus on challenge and overcoming fears, friendship, teamwork and support of others. Students from Years K – 12 will be engaged in Outdoor Education and it is considered an integral part of our Pastoral Care system. For these reasons it is an optional activity for all students to save stress Year 11 will follow a modified program during the period that Years 5 to 6 are participating in Outdoor Education.

The ‘House’ system is strongly linked to Tutor groups and students are encouraged to find ways to be involved in a wide range of co curricular activities including sport, music, drama and public speaking. Each House has a staff member to coordinate, staff assigned to assist and senior leaders to organise and enthuse students. The aim of House activities is to enable students to feel they belong and can contribute in a variety of ways to the success of their house and to build house and school spirit.

The house names have been produced from four contemporary Christian Australians who have made a valuable contributions to society. The Houses are  Allen ,  Booth ,  Chapman , and  Chiswell . Named from Carol Allen, Brian Booth, John Chapman, and Nicky Chiswell. [ citation needed ]

Parents play a very important role in assisting teachers to encourage students to be responsible and enthusiastic in the way they approach all aspects of school life. Communication between parents and teachers through the student diary is a vital component of our pastoral care. Tutors and class teachers will check the student diaries each week and we ask parents to show that they are regularly monitoring their child’s progress by sighting and signing them at the end of each week. Parents are asked to encourage students and to support the school in ensuring that their children wear the correct school uniform, attend all school days except when ill, and make their best effort with all academic work and co curricular activities. [ citation needed ]

The college has a prosperous future. The college has been estimated to have over 950 enrolments when completed. [4]  As the college continues to grow, it will be continuing with the construction of buildings such as the various class blocks, and gymnasium.

Coordinates :  34°35′42″S   150°50′48″E ﻿ / ﻿ 34.59500°S 150.84667°E ﻿ /  -34.59500; 150.84667