The  Six Yogas of Nāropa  ( Wylie :  na ro'i chos drug ), also called the  six dharmas of Naropa, [1]  are a set of advanced  Tibetan Buddhist   tantric  practices and a  meditation   sādhanā  compiled in and around the time of the Indian monk and mystic  Nāropa  (1016-1100 CE) and conveyed to his student  Marpa Lotsawa . The six yogas were intended in part to help in the attainment of  Buddhahood  in an accelerated manner.

Peter Alan Roberts notes that the proper terminology is "six Dharmas of Nāropa", not "six yogas of Nāropa":

"Tilopa briefly described these six practices in a short verse text entitled  Instructions on the Six Dharmas . In Tibet these practices became known as the  six Dharmas of Nāropa . In English they became known as the six  yogas  of Nāropa through their being first translated in 1935 by Evans-Wentz in  Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines , even though Evans-Wentz only referred to them as "six doctrines," which is the equivalent of six Dharmas. The term  yoga (sbyor ba)  is never used for this set of practices in Tibetan, and they should not be confused with the Kālacaka tradition's group of six practices that  are  called  yogas ." [2]

The six dharmas are a synthesis or collection of the completion stage practices of several tantras. In the  Kagyu  traditions by which the six dharmas were first brought to Tibet,  abhiṣeka  into at least one  Anuttarayoga Tantra  system (generally  Cakrasaṃvara  and/or  Vajrayogini /Vajravarāhi Tantras) and practice of its  utpatti-krama  are the bases for practice of the six dharmas; there is no particular empowerment for the six dharmas themselves. The six dharmas are ordered and progressive, each subsequent set of practices builds on previous attainments.

Though variously classified in up to ten dharmas, the six dharmas generally conform to the following list:

( Tibetan ,  Wylie transliteration  and  Sanskrit  in parentheses)

These next three are considered the main practices of the  completion stage  ( Wylie :  dzog rim , S:  saṃpannakrama ) in the anuttarayoga tantra. [4] [5]

Other dharmas, sometimes grouped with those above, or set as auxiliary practices, include:

As  Nāropa  is regarded as a  Kagyu  lineage holder, the six meditative practices are strongly associated with the  Kagyu  lineages of  Vajrayana   Buddhism . The teachings of  Tilopa  (988-1069 CE) are the earliest known work on the six dharmas. Tilopa is said to have received the teachings directly from  Cakrasaṃvara .  Nāropa  learned the techniques from  Tilopa . Nāropa's student  Marpa  taught the Tibetan  Milarepa , renowned for his yogic skills.  Milarepa  in turn taught  Gampopa . Gampopa's student,  Düsum Khyenpa, 1st Karmapa Lama , attained enlightenment while practicing the six dharmas. [ citation needed ]  The  Karmapa , the first figure in Tibetan Buddhism whose reincarnation was officially recognized, has been strongly associated in certain  tulkus  with particular yogic attributes.

Many  Gelugpa  practitioners including  Dalai Lamas  are expert in the six dharmas of  Nāropa .

Before engaging in the actual practices of the Six Dharmas, one begins by doing the "six exercises of Naropa".  Trülkhor  (Tibetan ' khrul-'khor )

Here the body is envisioned as being entirely without substance, appearing in the mind like a rainbow in the sky. This meditation and the physical exercises should be practiced in conjunction with one another.

( Tib.   gtum-mo ) Visualizing the channels, Visualizing the mantric syllables and engaging in the vase breathing technique. This gives rise to five signs: like a mirage, like a wisp of smoke, like the flickering of fireflies, like a glowing butter lamp, and like a sky free of clouds.

( Tib.   dga'-ba bzhi ) Bliss at the throat  chakra , supreme bliss at the heart  chakra , inexpressible bliss or special bliss at the navel  chakra , and innate bliss at the secret place, tip of the jewel.

This is accomplished by relying on two conditions; the internal condition of meditating on inner heat yoga and the external condition of relying upon a  karmamudrā .

The above are usually termed the 'four handseals' with only the last one called  mahamudra . There are various lists, usually some combination of the following: Action Mudra ( Karmamudra ), Wisdom Mudra ( Jnanamudra ), Phenomena Mudra ( Dharmamudra ), Pledge Mudra ( Samayamudra ), and Great Mudra ( Mahamudra ). An action mudra is a woman, phenomena mudra is all appearance, commitment or pledge mudra is  tummo , wisdom mudra is the meditation deity, and non-duality is the great mudra.

While many of the traditional lists of types of consorts to seek out for joint practice to gain spiritual attainments are written for males and from a male point of view, there are some rare instructions for these  sadhanas  and for consort choice from the point of view of female practitioners. [11]

( Tib.   dag-pa’i sgyu-lus ) Meditations on all appearances as illusory, dream illusions, and  bardo  experience.

(Tib.  don-gyi ‘od-gsal ) The four emptinesses lead to the experience of clear light during the waking period and during sleep. The four emptinesses are: Emptiness, Very Empty, Great Emptiness, and Utter Emptiness. They are associated with external and internal signs of the appearance of mirage, smoke, fireflies, butterlamp, cloudless sky; and whiteness, redness, blackness, and the clear light of early dawn which resembles a mixture of sunlight and moonlight, respectively.

(Tib.  zung-'jug ) Actualizing the results. The state of a Buddha  Vajradhāra .

(Tib.  phowa grong 'jug )

The branches of that path. [12]  There are two ways to practice the transference of consciousness: with a support and without a support.

Separating the body and the mind without a support is achieved through the emptiness of great conceptlessness whereby the mind is not attached to the body and the body is not attached to the mind.

Separating the body and the mind with a support, on the other hand, requires one to imagine the mind as a substance. With awareness one draws the mind up the central channel and then with force expels the mind into the space of the sky.

There are two methods to separate a body and a mind with support: transference in stages, and transference all at once at the time of death.

Transference in stages involves dissolving the sufferings of the  six realms  into a  bindu  which ascends the body and travels upwards in the central channel.

Starting under the sole of the feet, each point radiates colored light. Feet: black-hell, joining yellow-hungry-ghosts together at the secret place. At the navel: gray-animals. At the heart: green-human. At the throat: red-demigods, and at the crown: white-gods.

Once the  bindu  has reached the crown, it has the nature of five colors, corresponding to the last five stages (black is not counted). This  bindu  then leaves the central channel through the crown and comes to rest inside the heart of a deity that is one  cubit  above in space.

The mind is rested in equipoise in this state.

The six dharmas of  Niguma  are almost identical to the six dharmas of  Nāropa .  Niguma  who was an enlightened  dakini , a  Vajrayana  teacher, one of the founders of the  Shangpa Kagyu   Buddhist  lineage, and, depending on the sources, either the sister or spiritual consort of  Nāropa . The second  Dalai Lama ,  Gendun Gyatso  has compiled a work on these yogas. [13]   Niguma  transmitted her teachings to  yogini   Sukhasiddhī  and then to  Khyungpu Neldjor , [14]  the founder of the  Shangpa Kagyu  lineage. A translator and teacher in the lineage,  Lama Sarah Harding , has published a book about  Niguma  and the core role her teachings such as the six dharmas of  Niguma  have played in the development of the  Shangpa Kagyu  lineage. [15]

In the lineage of  Machig Labdron , the practice of  Mahamudra   Chöd  begins with The Yoga of the Transference of Consciousness.