" Some Nights " is a song by American  indie pop  band  Fun . It was released on June 4, 2012, as the second single from their  second studio album of the same name . The song was written by  Jeff Bhasker ,  Nate Ruess ,  Andrew Dost , and  Jack Antonoff . Musically "Some Nights" is an  indie pop  song with elements of  power pop  and  afrobeat  while the lyrics depict the protagonist having an  existential crisis .

In the United States, "Some Nights" was a  sleeper hit , spending approximately seven months on the  Billboard  Hot 100  before reaching a peak of number three for six non-consecutive weeks beginning the week of September 29, 2012. The song became Fun's second single to enter the chart's top ten, as well as their second song to be certified platinum in the US, after their previous single, " We Are Young ". "Some Nights" was also successful in countries around the world. [ further explanation needed ]

Musically, "Some Nights" is an indie pop song with strong, festive elements of power pop and influences from  folk rock . It is written in the key of  C major  at a  tempo  of 108 beats per minute. A line in their lyrics, "this is it boys, this is war", recalls the English version of  Nena 's 1983 hit " 99 Luftballons ". Lyrically, the song expresses the existential angst of a young protagonist who is a long way from home. [1]  Lead singer Nate Ruess explained to Mesfin Fekadu of the  Associated Press : "I'm always thinking about, 'Who am I and why did I do something like that?' And I think then it harkens back to my family, and I have such a strong tie to them and it's always therapeutic to sing about them." [2]  Ruess came up with the song and album title while on tour in  Scotland ; he wrote the song based on the title. Lyrically, the song is about "just being someone different on any given night." [3]

There has been some confusion with the fans as the lyric "Some terrible nights" was mistaken for "...lies". Members of Fun. confirmed on November 18, 2012 on their  Twitter  and  Facebook  accounts that "it's NIGHTS not LIES." [4] [5]  Many critics have noted significant similarities between "Some Nights" and  Simon and Garfunkel 's " Cecilia ." [6] [7]  Ruess commented that Simon's  Graceland  (1986) was an influence on the song in an interview with  Billboard . [3]

The Re-View calls "Some Nights" a "bolder, catchier and more striking track than its predecessor " We Are Young ", upping the stakes when it comes to both style and substance." In closing, he cited the track as one that would "cement [Fun] as one of the most intriguing and exciting new bands to emerge from the States in recent years." [8]   The Guardian  writer Dave Simpson compared Ruess's vocals in the song to those of  Freddie Mercury  and called the lyrics "sincere and oddly moving". [9]

Ray Rahman of  Entertainment Weekly , while reviewing the whole album, criticized its second half as inferior to the first and also called "Some Nights" the best track on the album, alongside " We Are Young ". [10]

Rolling Stone  named the song the 11th best song of 2012. [11]

"Some Nights" has reached number one in Australia, New Zealand, and Israel. The song has also reached the top ten in the United States, Canada, Ireland, Austria, Italy, Belgium, and the United Kingdom, and has so far made the top 30 in the Netherlands, Sweden, and Switzerland; it has also charted in Japan.

In the United States, "Some Nights" debuted on the  Billboard  Hot 100  the same week their album  Some Nights  debuted at number 3 on the  Billboard  200 . The song remained in the lower region of the chart for approximately four months due to low-level sales and consistent high-level streaming, before finally entering the top 40 in its 18th week. In its 23rd week, it switched places with " We Are Young " at number 11 on the chart, where it stayed the week after. In the song's 25th week on the chart, it entered the top ten by jumping to number 8. In its sixth week in the top ten, it reached number 3, which has been its peak position. As of March 2014, the song has sold over 5 million copies in the United States. [12]  It also reached number 2 on the  Mainstream Top 40  chart, coincidentally behind  Maroon 5 's " One More Night ".

The music video for "Some Nights" was released on MTV.com on June 4, 2012. The video was produced by Poonam Sehrawat and directed by  Anthony Mandler . The video shows a fictional battle taking place during the  American Civil War  and shows the band singing from afar as war breaks out with lead singer Nate appearing as the commander of the Union force. The story also follows two particular soldiers, one from each side of the conflict. From the Confederacy, the song follows a middle-aged farmer clearly in love with his life, land and animals, while from the Union side the story follows two young lovers torn apart as the young man heads off to the fight. The broken loves, of beauty and of nature, eventually clash in the battle with consequences for both the loser and winner, showing that the personal costs of war will continue far beyond the battleground.

"Some Nights" appeared in the series finale of  Harry's Law , and has been used in television spots for the  ABC  program  Secret Millionaire . The song was also used in promos for the  2012 MTV Movie Awards  and the  2013 BCS National Championship Game . Fun performed the song on  The Colbert Report ,  Late Night with Jimmy Fallon ,  Sunrise ,  The Jonathan Ross Show , and  Saturday Night Live . [13]  It also was used in trailers and advertisements promoting the Disney animate film  Wreck It Ralph .

The  Chicago Blackhawks  use the song as a backing track in several promotional montages. [14] [15]

Southwest Airlines  used the song in the first TV spot for their "Welcome Aboard" ad campaign, which was also their first campaign by  TBWA/Chiat/Day .

* sales figures based on certification alone 
 ^ shipments figures based on certification alone 
 sales+streaming figures based on certification alone

On Air With Ryan Seacrest  reviews a collaborative video version of  Some Nights  performed by nine, " YouTube  stars". Produced by Jake Coco and  W. G. Snuffy Walden , vocalists include Jake Coco, Corey Gray, Caitlin Hart, Madilyn Bailey,  Savannah Outen ,  Jess Moskaluke ,  Sara Niemietz , Eppic, and Black Prez. [73]  Released on Jake Coco's YouTube channel on August 11, 2012, by October 13, 2012 this cover version received 4,532,233 views in 64 days. [74]  In August 2012 Some Nights was covered by Canadian band Walk Off The Earth for their YouTube channel. Ohio based metalcore band  Like Moths To Flames  covered the song on the compilation album  Punk Goes Pop 5 .

Ellie Goulding  has covered the song as well in late 2012 on  BBC Radio  in the "Live Lounge".

The song was covered by the New Directions glee club in the " Dynamic Duets " episode of  Glee .

On April 25, 2013, teen actress and musician  Victoria Justice  (of  Nickelodeon 's  Victorious ) posted a softer acoustic rendition of "Some Nights". [75] [76]

A cappella  group  Straight No Chaser  released a mashup of this song and " We Are Young " for their 2013 album  Under the Influence . [77]

The song was covered  The Band Perry  in concert from Jackson MI  We Are Pioneers World Tour  2013 with mashup "Night Gone Wasted" [78]

South African singer Bobby van Jaarsveld performed a version live on Jacaranda FM in April 2013. [79]