SS  Slamat  (or "DSS  Slamat ", with DSS standing for  dubbelschroefstoomschip , "twin-screw steamship") was a Dutch  ocean liner  of the  Rotterdam -based  Koninklijke Rotterdamsche Lloyd  line. Although she was a  turbine steamship , she tended not to be referred to as "TSS". She was built in  Vlissingen  in the  Netherlands  in 1924 for liner service between Rotterdam and the  Dutch East Indies . In 1940 she was converted into a  troop ship . In 1941 she was sunk with great loss of life in the  Battle of Greece .

Koninklijke Maatschappij De Schelde  built  Slamat  in  Vlissingen  on the River  Scheldt , completing her in 1924. Her boilers had  oil -burning furnaces, and her engines were  steam turbines  that drove her twin  screws   via  double reduction gearing. She was equipped with submarine signalling apparatus, which in the 1920s was seen as an alternative to radio. She also had wireless  direction finding  equipment. [5]

Slamat  was built for  Koninklijke Rotterdamsche Lloyd  (KRL or "Royal Dutch Lloyd") and managed by Willem Ruys en Zonen. [5]  Willem Ruys ran KRL and the two companies were part of the same group. KRL ships operated passenger and cargo services between  Rotterdam  and the Dutch East Indies  via   Southampton ,  Marseille  and the  Suez Canal . [3] [6]   Slamat  was KRL's last major steam turbine passenger liner before it started introducing motor ships:  Indrapoera  in 1925,  Sibajak  in 1927 and the larger and swifter  Baloeran  and  Dempo  in 1929. [3]

In 1931  Slamat  was refitted and lengthened [4]  by 27.6 feet (8.4 m), which slightly increased each of her tonnages. [7]  Her speed was increased to 17 knots (31 km/h). [4]

In peacetime  Slamat  carried KRL's livery of dove-grey hull, white superstructure and black funnels. [8]

When the Second World War began the Netherlands was neutral. In mid-October 1939  Slamat  left Rotterdam for the East Indies, calling at  Lisbon ,  Cape Verde ,  Cape Town ,  Mauritius ,  Sabang  and  Singapore  before reaching  Batavia , capital of the Dutch East Indies, on 30 November. On 1 December she left Batavia for Italy, which was also still neutral. She called at Sabang,  Aden  and  Port Said  before arriving on 21 December in  Genoa , where she spent Christmas 1939 and New Year 1940. She left Genoa on 10 January for the East Indies, calling at  Suez , Aden and Sabang before reaching Batavia on 1 February. [9]

In May 1940  Germany conquered the Netherlands in one week  and the  Dutch monarchy and government evacuated to London . Germany captured KRL's managing director Willem Ruys, and the company transferred the registration of its ships including  Slamat  from Rotterdam to  Batavia . [10]

On 6 July KRL's  Indrapoera  left Batavia for  Surabaya  in eastern Java, and on the 19th  Slamat  followed her. Then the two liners sailed to the  Philippines , which were then neutral.  Indrapoera  sailed ahead, leaving Surabaya on 26 July and reaching  Manila  on the 31st.  Slamat  followed three days behind her, reaching Manila on 3 August. By then  Indrapoera  had already left for Australia, and the next day  Slamat  followed. Each liner called at  Thursday Island, Queensland  before reaching  Sydney Harbour ,  Indrapoera  on 13 August and  Slamat  on the 17th. [11]  There they joined two other Dutch ocean liners;  Stoomvaart-Maatschappij Nederland 's 16,287  GRT   Christiaan Huygens  and  Koninklijke Paketvaart-Maatschappij 's  Nieuw Holland , which between them embarked 4,315 Australian troops. On 12 September the Dutch ships left Sydney for  Fremantle  in  Western Australia , where they formed Convoy  US  5, which left Fremantle on 22 September and reached Suez on 12 October.  Indrapoera  and  Slamat  continued through the  Suez Canal , called at Port Said and on 17 October reached  Haifa  in  Palestine . [9]

In September 1940  Italy invaded Egypt , where British and Empire forces now needed reinforcement from the Dominions and Empire. From now on a number of Dutch troop ships concentrated on bringing  British Empire  troops across the  Indian Ocean  to the Near East.  Indrapoera  and  Slamat  left Haifa on 21 October, reached Port Said the next day, and then passed through the Suez Canal. For the next six months the two KRL ships operated in the Indian Ocean, bringing  British Empire  troops from  India  and  Ceylon  to Egypt. [9] [11]

Indrapoera  and  Slamat  spent Christmas 1940 and New Year 1941 in  Bombay . On 14 January 1941 they reached  Colombo  to take part in Convoy US 8 to Suez. [9] [11]  This was a huge troop movement: seven British and five Dutch troop ships, accompanied by two British cargo ships. The other Dutch ships were  Christiaan Huygens , SMN's  Johan de Witt  and KPM's  Nieuw Zeeland . Among the British ships was  Shaw, Savill & Albion Line 's flagship  QSMV  Dominion Monarch , which at 27,155  GRT  was the largest liner in the Indian Ocean. US 8 left Colombo on 16 January and reached Suez on the 28th. [12]

After US 8,  Indrapoera  and  Slamat  continued to operate in the Indian Ocean until April 1941. Then  Indrapoera  headed  via   Durban  to the  Caribbean  and  United States , [11]  but  Slamat  returned to the Mediterranean. [9]

In April 1941 Germany and Italy  invaded Yugoslavia  and  Greece . After 10 days of fierce fighting the British Empire started to plan the evacuation of 60,000 troops from Greece.

Slamat  had been spending the month making shuttle trips between Suez and  Port Sudan , but by 23 April she was in the  Mediterranean Sea  and on the 24th she was in Convoy  AG 14  from  Alexandria  to Greece. When the convoy reached Greek waters, it split to reach different embarkation points. [13]   Slamat  and another troop ship, the  British-India Line -managed  Khedive Ismail , were ordered with the cruiser  HMS  Calcutta  and a number of destroyers to  Nauplia [14]  and  Tolon  on the  Argolic Gulf  in the eastern  Peloponnese .

Before their arrival another troopship had grounded in Nauplia Bay, blocking ship access to the port. An air attack had turned her into a total loss. [15]  Ships would now have to anchor in the bay, where boats would bring troops out to them from the shore.  En route  to Nauplia  Slamat ' s group of ships was bombed and her superstructure was heavily damaged.

On the evening of 26 April three cruisers, four destroyers and  Khedive Ismail  and  Slamat  were in the Bay of Nauplia. The only available tenders were one landing craft, local  caïques  and the ships' own boats. Two cruisers and two destroyers embarked nearly 2,500 troops, but the slow rate of embarkation meant that  Khedive Ismail  did not get its turn and did not embark any. [13]

At 0300 hrs  Calcutta  ordered all ships to sail, but  Slamat  disobeyed and continued embarking troops.  Calcutta  and  Khedive Ismail  sailed at 0400 hrs;  Slamat  followed at 0415 hrs, by which time she had embarked about 500 troops: about half her capacity. [14]

The convoy steamed south down the Argolic Gulf, until at 0645 [13]  or 0715 hrs [14]   Luftwaffe  aircraft attacked it: first  Bf 109  fighters, then  Ju 87   dive bombers  and  Ju 88  and  Do 17  bombers. [13]  A 250 kg (550 lb) bomb exploded between  Slamat ' s  bridge  and forward funnel, setting her afire. Her water system became disabled, hampering her crew's ability to fight the fire. Another bomb also hit her and she listed to starboard. [13]

Slamat ' s  Master , Tjalling Luidinga, gave the order to abandon ship. The bombing and fire had destroyed some of her lifeboats and  life rafts , and her remaining boats and rafts were launched under a second  Stuka  attack. [16]  The destroyer  HMS  Hotspur  reported seeing four bombs hit  Slamat . Two lifeboats capsized; one from overloading and another when, in the midst of transferring survivors,  Diamond  had to speed away from her to evade an air attack. Some aircraft machine-gunned survivors in the water. [13]

The rest of the convoy kept moving, while  Calcutta  rescued some survivors and ordered the destroyer  Diamond  to rescue more. At 0815 hrs  Diamond  was still rescuing survivors and still under attack. At 0916 hrs three destroyers from Crete reinforced the convoy, so  Calcutta  sent one of them,  HMS  Wryneck , to assist  Diamond . At 0925 hrs  Diamond  reported that she had rescued most of the survivors and was heading for Souda Bay. [13]   Wryneck  reached  Diamond  about 1000 hrs [13]  and requested aircraft cover at 1025 hrs. [14]

Diamond  accompanied by  Wryneck  returned to  Slamat , arriving about 1100 hrs. They found two lifeboats from  Slamat  and rescued their occupants.  Slamat  was afire from stem to stern, and  Diamond  fired a torpedo at her port side that sank her in a  coup de grâce . [13] [16]  By now  Diamond  carried about 600 of  Slamat ' s survivors, including Captain Luidinga. [13]

About 1315 hrs a  Staffel  of Ju 87 bombers came out of the sun in a surprise attack on the two destroyers. Two bombs damaged  Diamond , destroyed both of her lifeboats and sank her in eight minutes. Three bombs hit  Wryneck ; she capsized to  port  and sank in 10–15 minutes.  Wryneck  launched her  whaler  and each destroyer launched her three  Carley floats . [13]  Several men in the Carley floats died either from wounds or from drowning in the swell. [13]

Wryneck ' s  Commissioned Engineer , Maurice Waldron, took command of her whaler and she set off east past  Cape Maleas , towing two Carley floats and their occupants. In the evening the wind increased, causing the floats to strike the boat, so Waldron reluctantly cast them adrift. [13]

After 1900 hrs on 27 April the  Vice Admiral , Light Forces,  Henry Pridham-Wippell , became concerned that  Diamond  had not returned to Souda Bay and was not answering radio signals.  Wryneck  had been ordered to keep  radio silence  so no attempt was made to radio her. [17]  Pridham-Wippell sent the destroyer  HMS  Griffin  to the position where  Slamat  had been lost. She found 14 survivors in two Carley floats that night, more floats and another four survivors in the morning, and took the survivors to Crete. [13]

The last living survivor from  Slamat , [18]   Royal Army Service Corps  veteran George Dexter, states that after  Wryneck  was sunk he and three other men were rescued by the cruiser  HMS  Orion . [19]

Survivors in  Wryneck ' s whaler reached Crete in three stages. On 28 April they aimed for the island of  Milos  in the  Aegean Sea , but were too exhausted so they landed at Ananes Rock, about 13 nautical miles (24 km) southeast of Milos. There they met a caïque full of Greek refugees and British soldiers evacuated from  Piraeus , who were sheltering by day and sailing only by night to avoid detection. In the evening everyone left Ananes and headed south for Crete, with most people in the caïque and five being towed in the whaler. On 29 April the caïque sighted a  small landing craft  that had left  Porto Rafti  near Athens. She took aboard everyone from the caïque and whaler, and the next day they reached Souda Bay. [13]

Nearly 1,000 people were killed in the loss of  Slamat ,  Diamond  and  Wryneck . Of the 500 or so soldiers that  Slamat  embarked, eight survived. [17]  Of her complement of 193 crew and 21 Australian and New Zealand  DEMS  gunners and NZEF Medical Corps, [20]  11 survived. Of  Diamond ' s 166 complement, 20 survived. Of  Wryneck ' s 106 crew, 27 survived. [16]

In August 1946 Queen  Wilhelmina of the Netherlands  wrote to Captain Luidinga's widow, expressing her sympathy for her husband's death, gratitude for his war service and commending him as  een groot zoon van ons zeevarend volk  ("a great son of our seafaring people"). [16]

British and  Commonwealth  troops and naval personnel who were lost in the sinking of  Slamat ,  Diamond  and  Wryneck  are named on the  Commonwealth War Graves Commission 's Athens Memorial in Phaleron War Cemetery at  Palaio Faliro  southeast of Athens. [21]  Royal Navy personnel are also commemorated in Britain on the Royal Navy monuments at  Chatham ,  Plymouth  and  Portsmouth . George Dexter commissioned a monument to all the service personnel lost when the three ships were sunk. It is in  The Royal British Legion  Club,  Shard End ,  Birmingham . [19]

In 2011 a monument commemorating victims from all three ships was made by the Dutch sculptor  Nicolas van Ronkenstein . It was installed in the  Sint-Laurenskerk  ("St Lawrence Church"), Rotterdam and formally unveiled on the 70th anniversary of the disaster, 27 April. [16]

On 27 June 2012 the current  HMS  Diamond  hosted a wreath-laying ceremony at the position where  Slamat  was sunk. Participants included  Diamond ' s commander, descendants of some of the dead from the Netherlands and New Zealand, and the Commander in Chief of the  Hellenic Navy . [22]

Coordinates :  37°01′N   23°10′E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.02°N 23.17°E ﻿ /  37.02; 23.17