In the  performing arts , a  stage mother  is the mother of a  child actor . The mother will often drive her child to auditions, make sure he or she is on the  set  on time, etc. The term  stage mother  sometimes has a negative connotation, suggesting that the individual is prone to obnoxiously demanding special treatment for her child, or suggesting that the individual has placed inappropriate pressure on her child to succeed, perhaps for reasons of vicariously living out her own dreams through the child [1] . Entitled and grandiose demands have sometimes led to reportedly veiled threats from a stage parent, for instance comments made by LaVar Ball while promoting the basketball career of his son, Lonzo Ball [2] .

A stage mother may also be the official manager of her child (e.g.,  Rose Thompson Hovick ,  Dina Lohan ,  Ethel Gumm ,  Teri Shields ,  Susan Duff , etc.) — representing her child in negotiations for the professional services of her child. Such managers have often been referred to as "momagers" in the film industry. [3]

In certain cases where a mother and child both work in the film industry, an automatic labeling of "stage mother" can be affixed to the mother [ by whom? ]  without cause.  Kathie Lee Gifford  has been against the concept of stage mothers and had explained that when her son Cody co-starred with her in the film  Model Behavior , it had been on his own volition to try acting and not at her insistence. [ citation needed ]  Ironically, Gifford plays a stage mother in that movie.

Fathers have also been known to manage their children in this way, such as  Joseph Jackson  (patriarch of the  Jackson family ),  Murry Wilson  (father of three of  The Beach Boys ),  Joe Simpson  (father of  Jessica  and  Ashlee Simpson ),  Jeff Archuleta  (father of  American Idol  runner-up  David Archuleta ),  Mathew Knowles  (father of  Beyoncé  and  Solange Knowles ) and  Kit Culkin  (father of  Macaulay Culkin  and  Kieran Culkin ). [4]  A historical example of such a father was the father of  Mozart , who recognized his son's musical ability at an early age and made the most of it. [ citation needed ]

Abraham Quintanilla, Jr. , father of Tejano superstar  Selena , is credited with having discovered Selena's gift of singing; he rounded up her and her siblings as a band (Selena Y Los Dinos), named for his band in his younger days.

Stage fathers share a similar role with parents promoting their children in professional sports [5] . The drive to enhance their child's success, and vicariously the father's own financial furtherance and fame can include implementation of strength and exercise regimens at a young age and backhanded actions such as delaying enrollment in school so their sons will be bigger than their classmates. [6]   Lavar Ball , father of Los Angeles Laker Lonzo Ball, achieved notoriety for spurious self aggrandizement [7] [8] [9]  and inflation of his son's assets, including questionable claims that his son's basketball skills exceeded those of Stephen Curry [10] , LeBron James and Russell Westbrook [11] . While promoting, among other things, an extraordinarily expensive brand of basketball shoes [12] , the elder parent took issue with Fox Sports 1 reporter, Kristine Leahy, on The Herd with Colin Cowherd, saying, "She scares me. I don’t look over there because I’m scared of her. I’m thinking assault right now. Leave me alone.” Ball went on to make the alleged threat, "Something's coming to you (Leahy), and it's okay." [2].

A variant of the term has been a "script mother", or a woman writer who sees her children as a means for writing books or screenplays based on humiliating events in the child's life, to the detriment of the child, or exaggerating a child's personal problems. [ citation needed ]  Script mothers can be writers, comedians or cartoonists. [ citation needed ]

An example of a script mother has been  Lynn Johnston , who has been criticized for exploiting her children (and husband) in her comic strip  For Better or for Worse , as opposed to many cartoonists such as Charles Schultz and Berke Breathed who make up fictional characters. Johnston's children eventually had to be pulled out of school due to the constant bullying and embarrassment they received in being compared to their comic strip counterparts, and placed into a  private school  with tougher regulations on student conduct. [13]

Real-life stage mothers and their children have been a popular subject for  reality television  shows, including the shows  I Know My Kid's a Star  (2008),  Dance Moms  (2011-present),  Toddlers & Tiaras  (2008-2013) and its highly successful spinoff  Here Comes Honey Boo Boo  (2012-2014).