State of Play  is a  British television  drama series, written by  Paul Abbott  and directed by  David Yates , that was first broadcast on  BBC One  in 2003. The series tells the story of a newspaper's investigation into the death of a political researcher, and centres on the relationship between the leading journalist, Cal McCaffrey, and his old friend, Stephen Collins, who is a Member of Parliament and the murdered woman's employer. The series is primarily set in  London  and was produced in-house by the  BBC  in association with the independent production company Endor Productions. The series stars  David Morrissey ,  John Simm ,  Kelly Macdonald ,  Polly Walker ,  Bill Nighy , and  James McAvoy  in the main roles.

The series was Abbott's first attempt to write a political thriller, and he initially made the majority of the plot up as he went along. He was prompted to write the series after BBC  Head of Drama   Jane Tranter  asked him whether he would consider writing a piece "bigger" than anything he had written so far in his career. [1]  The serial was Abbott's third major writing project for the channel, following  Clocking Off  and  Linda Green . The series was also a major turning point in  David Yates ' directorial career, as he began to direct various high-profile television projects following his work on the series.

The six-part series was broadcast on  BBC One  on Sunday evenings at 9:00pm from May 18 to June 22, 2003. Episodes two to five were initially premiered on the  digital television  station  BBC Four  at 10:00pm on the nights of the preceding episodes' BBC One broadcast; however episode six was held back for a premiere on BBC One, so as not to allow the final twists to be spoiled for those who did not have access to digital television. In 2004, the series ran in the  United States  on the BBC's  BBC America  cable channel. In 2005, the series was released on DVD by  BBC Worldwide , in a two-disc set. Episode one features an  audio commentary  from Abbott and Yates, and episode six a commentary from Yates, producer  Hilary Bevan-Jones  and editor  Mark Day .

The success of the series and its favourable impression on BBC executives led to Abbott being commissioned to write a sequel, before the first series had even been aired. [1] [2]  In 2006, however, a second series appeared to have been abandoned, with Abbott telling  Mark Lawson  on  BBC Radio 4 's  Front Row  in November that he "couldn't find a way to make the story work". In 2007, Abbott was quoted in  The Sun  as saying that he was currently writing scripts for a second, six-episode series of  State of Play , with  John Simm  and  Bill Nighy  reprising their roles; however no such series has since come to fruition. [3]

While investigating the murder of fifteen-year-old teenager Kelvin Stagg in what appears to be a drug-related killing, journalist Cal McCaffrey of  The Herald  ( John Simm ) and his colleagues Della Smith ( Kelly Macdonald ) and Cameron Foster ( Bill Nighy ) find a connection with the coincidental death of Sonia Baker, a young researcher for MP Stephen Collins ( David Morrissey ). As their investigation progresses, they uncover not only a connection between the deaths, but a conspiracy with links to oil industry-backed corruption of high-ranking British government ministers.

Reviewing the first episode for  The Guardian  newspaper the day after it had aired,  Gareth McLean  wrote that "...it's bloody magic. The story is gripping, the acting is ace and Paul Abbott's script is outstanding. His ear for dialogue, and for different voices, is exceptional. The exposition is swift, nifty and joyously unclunky. The characters are credible and rounded. If you can count the best dramas of recent years on the fingers of both hands, it's time to grow a new finger." [1]  Other newspaper critics were similarly impressed with the opening installment. In  The Times ,  Paul Hoggart  wrote that "Two excellent performances [from Morrissey and Simm] ensure that the relationship has a turbulent dynamism that is credible and engaging." [4]  James Walton in  The Daily Telegraph  was more cautious, feeling that the opening episode had been promising but the serial as a whole still had the potential to go wrong. "At this stage however, the programme is certainly good enough to make me hope not and to ensure that I'll be back next week to find out." [5]

The consensus appeared to be that the serial did maintain its quality to the end. Previewing episode four, Jonathan Wright of  The Guide  section in  The Guardian  described it as "A political conspiracy thriller that's as buttock-clenchingly tense as  Edge of Darkness , as cynical about the British political system as  House of Cards , and stands comparisons to both." [6]  The television critic of  The Independent ,  Tom Sutcliffe , wrote of the final episode: "I'm not sure that a thriller can end in anything other than anti- climax. If it has been good you're sad it's over, and if it ends badly you're quite likely to feel that you've been duped. Paul Abbott's  State of Play , which has had me swallowing double doses on a Sunday evening whenever the schedules allowed, left us with the first kind of let-down rather than the second." [7]

Bill Nighy won the  British Academy Television Award  for Best Actor for his role. The series also won a  Peabody Award  in 2004 [8]  and won BAFTAs for Best Sound (Fiction/Entertainment) and Best Editing (Fiction/Entertainment). It was nominated, but did not win, in the Best Actor category again, for Morrissey; in the Best Drama Serial category; Best Original Television Music and Best Photography and Lighting. It also won major awards from the  Royal Television Society ,  Banff Television Festival ,  Broadcasting Press Guild ,  Cologne Conference ,  Directors Guild of Great Britain ,  Edgar Awards , and the  Monte Carlo TV Festival . [9]

State of Play  was  adapted  into an  Americanized  feature film that was released in the United States in April 2009. The plot retained substantial similarities to the original six-hour series, retaining the main characters, but with its location changed to Washington, D.C., and with certain aspects condensed and changed in order to fit the two-hour format.

The film was directed by  Kevin Macdonald  from a screenplay written by  Matthew Michael Carnahan ,  Tony Gilroy ,  Peter Morgan , and  Billy Ray .  Ben Affleck ,  Russell Crowe ,  Rachel McAdams  and  Helen Mirren  appear in the lead roles. In an April 2009 interview to promote the film, Affleck, who plays Congressman Stephen Collins, said he drew on the experiences of  Gary Condit ,  Eliot Spitzer , and  John Edwards  while preparing for the role. [10]  The film was generally well received, but not as lauded as the series.