A  stew  is a combination of solid  food   ingredients  that have been  cooked  in  liquid  and served in the resultant  gravy . Ingredients in a stew can include any combination of  vegetables  (such as  carrots ,  potatoes ,  onions ,  beans ,  peppers  and  tomatoes ) or  meat , especially tougher meats suitable for slow-cooking, such as  beef .  Poultry ,  sausages , and  seafood  are also used. While water can be used as the stew-cooking liquid,  wine ,  stock , and  beer  are also common.  Seasoning  and  flavourings  may also be added. Stews are typically cooked at a relatively low temperature ( simmered , not  boiled ), allowing flavors to mingle.

Stewing is suitable for the least tender cuts of meat that become tender and juicy with the slow moist heat method. This makes it popular in low-cost cooking. Cuts having a certain amount of marbling and gelatinous connective tissue give moist, juicy stews, while lean meat may easily become dry.

Stews may be thickened by reduction or with  flour , either by coating pieces of meat with flour before searing, or by using a  roux  or  beurre manié , a dough consisting of equal parts of fat and flour. Thickeners like  cornstarch  or  arrowroot  may also be used.

Stews are similar to  soups , and in some cases there may not be a clear distinction between the two. Generally, stews have less liquid than soups, are much thicker and require longer cooking over low heat. While soups are almost always served in a bowl, stews may be thick enough to be served on a plate with the gravy as a sauce over the solid ingredients. [1]

Stews have been made since ancient times.  Herodotus  says that the  Scythians  (8th to 4th centuries BC) "put the flesh into an animal's paunch, mix water with it, and boil it like that over the bone fire. The bones burn very well, and the paunch easily contains all the meat once it has been stripped off. In this way an ox, or any other sacrificial beast, is ingeniously made to boil itself."

Amazonian  tribes used the shells of turtles as vessels, boiling the entrails of the turtle and various other ingredients in them. Other cultures [ who? ]  used the shells of large mollusks (clams etc.) to boil foods in. [ citation needed ]  There is archaeological evidence [ where? ]  of these practices going back 8,000 years or more. [ citation needed ]

There are recipes for lamb stews and fish stews in the Roman cookery book  Apicius , believed to date from the 4th century AD.  Le Viandier , one of the oldest cookbooks in  French , written in the early 14th century by the French chef known as  Taillevent , has  ragouts  or stews of various types in it. [2]

The first written reference to ' Irish stew ' is in  Byron 's "The Devil's Drive" (1814): "The Devil ... dined on ... a rebel or so in an Irish stew." [3]  Stew is traditionally known as an English dish and has been a household favorite for centuries.

In meat-based stews, white stews, also known as  blanquettes  or  fricassées , are made with lamb or veal that is  blanched , or lightly  seared  without browning, and cooked in stock. Brown stews are made with pieces of red meat that are first seared or browned, before a browned  mirepoix  and sometimes browned flour, stock and wine are added.