Stone Aerospace  is an  aerospace engineering  firm founded by engineer and  explorer   Bill Stone , located in  Del Valle , a suburb of  Austin, Texas . [1]

Bill Stone began Stone Aerospace as a part-time consulting business in 1999, at which time he was working at the  National Institute of Standards and Technology . At the time, Stone already had an extensive background in underground and underwater exploration, which had led him to develop several technologies to further human exploration capabilities. This background, and in particular the success of the Wakulla II Project in  Wakulla Springs ,  Florida , which employed Stone's human-navigated digital wall mapper, lead to inquiries as to whether it would be possible to design an  autonomous underwater vehicle , which could explore on its own, making exploration possible where it was not safe or possible for human  divers  to go. After submitting several proposals to  NASA , in 2003  DEPTHX  was funded. [1]  Shortly thereafter Stone's Piedra-Sombra Corporation began doing business as Stone Aerospace in Del Valle, Texas. After the successful autonomous exploration by DEPTHX of several  cenotes  in  Mexico , [2]  NASA then funded the  ENDURANCE  Project, which spent two seasons exploring frozen-over lakes in the  Dry Valleys  of  Antarctica . [3]  Project VALKYRIE was awarded NASA funding in 2010, and is currently in the early stages of development. [4]

DEPTHX was a NASA-funded project for which Stone Aerospace was the  principal investigator . Co-investigators included  Carnegie Mellon University , which was responsible for the navigation and guidance software, the  Southwest Research Institute , which built the vehicle's science  payload , and research scientists from the  University of Texas at Austin , the  Colorado School of Mines , and  NASA   Ames Research Center . [5]  The DEPTHX vehicle was a fully autonomous underwater vehicle outfitted with scientific sampling equipment [6]  designed to expand upon the limits of human underwater exploration, and was successfully tested over two field seasons in cenotes in northern Mexico. [2]  Among its most notable accomplishments were the discovery of at least three new  divisions  of  bacteria [7]  (the first such discovery by a robotic vehicle) and the first use of  three-dimensional   simultaneous localization and mapping  (SLAM). [8]

The NASA-funded ENDURANCE project built upon the successes of DEPTHX. The DEPTHX vehicle itself was reconfigured to create ENDURANCE, with a new science payload and new navigation systems added to meet the challenges particular to the frozen-over environment in Antarctica, where it spent two field seasons. [3]  The principal investigator for ENDURANCE was Dr.  Peter Doran  of the  University of Illinois at Chicago . Co-investigators were Stone Aerospace, Dr.  John Priscu  of  Montana State University , and NASA Ames Research Center. [9]  ENDURANCE spent two seasons exploring West  Lake Bonney  in the  Dry Valleys , autonomously collecting aqueous chemistry data as well as making  high-resolution  maps of the lake floor and the portion of  Taylor Glacier  which interfaces with the lake. [10]  The results are believed to be one of the most comprehensive three-dimensional biogeochemical maps of any lake on the planet. [3]  The project was the subject of an episode of  National Geographic Explorer  in 2010 which focused on the goal of discovering life on  Jupiter 's moon,  Europa . [11]

Stone Aerospace's VALKYRIE Project received its Phase II funding in May 2011. VALKYRIE will be an autonomous  cryobot  which will build on one of the primary goals of the  ENDURANCE  vehicle, which is to investigate the possibility of exploring the hypothesized  oceans  of frozen-over  moons  in our  solar system , such as  Europa , in the search for  extraterrestrial life . [4]  The VALKYRIE vehicle will get its melting power from a high-energy  laser , which itself would remain on the surface. The laser beam will travel down a long  fiber optic  cable (where the beam would then be amplified) which would feed out as the vehicle melts through the ice surface. Stone revealed this novel approach at NASA's  Astrobiology  Science Conference in April, 2012, and plans are underway to test the technology at  Matanuska Glacier  in  Alaska  in 2013. [12]