See text

Strombus  is a  genus  of medium to large  sea snails ,  marine   gastropod   molluscs  in the  family   Strombidae , which comprises the true conchs and their immediate relatives. The genus  Strombus  was named by Swedish Naturalist  Carl Linnaeus  in 1758. There were around 50 living species recognized, which vary in size from fairly small to very large. Six species live in the greater  Caribbean  region, including the queen conch,  Strombus gigas  (now usually known as  Eustrombus gigas  or  Lobatus gigas ), and the West Indian fighting conch,  Strombus pugilis . However, since 2006, many species have been assigned to discrete genera. [3]  These new genera are however not yet found in most textbooks and collector's guides.

Worldwide, several of the larger species are economically important as food sources; these include the endangered queen conch which very rarely also produces a pink, gem quality  pearl .

In the geological past, a much larger number of species of  Strombus  existed. [4]  Fossils of species within this genus have been found all over the world in sediments from  Cretaceous  to  Quaternary  (age range: 140.2 to 0.0 million years ago). [5]

Of the living species, most are in the  Indian  and  Pacific Oceans . Many species of true conchs live on sandy bottoms among beds of  sea grass  in tropical waters. They eat  algae  and have a claw-shaped  operculum .

Like almost all shelled gastropods, conches have spirally constructed  shells . Again, as is normally the case in many gastropods, this spiral shell growth is usually right-handed, but on very rare occasions it can be left-handed.

True conches have long eye stalks, with colorful ring-marked eyes at the tips. The shell has a long and narrow aperture, and a short  siphonal canal , with another indentation near the anterior end called a stromboid notch. This notch is where one of the two eye stalks protrudes from the shell.

The true conch has a foot ending in a pointed, sickle-shaped,  operculum  which can be dug into the substrate as part of an unusual "leaping" locomotion.

True conches grow a flared lip on their shells only upon reaching  sexual maturity . This is called an alated outer lip or alation.

Conches lay  eggs  in long strands: the eggs are contained in twisted gelatinous tubes. [6]   Strombus  moves with a leaping motion. [7]

Strombus  shells have a flaring outer lip with a notch near the anterior end called the  stromboid notch  through which the animal can protrude one of its stalked eyes. [8]

Terebellum terebellum

Canarium urceus

Conomurex luhuanus

Tricornis raninus

Lambis lambis

Strombus

Eustrombus

Aliger

Strombus gallus

Strombus gigas

Strombus costatus

Strombus raninus

Strombus peruvianus

Strombus galeus

Strombus latus

Strombus pugilis

Strombus alatus

Strombus gracilior

Strombus granulatus

The phylogenetic relationships among the Strombidae have been mainly accessed in two different occasions, using two distinct methods. In a 2005  monograph , Simone proposed a  cladogram  (a tree of descent) based on an extensive  morpho - anatomical  analysis of representatives of  Aporrhaidae , Strombidae,  Xenophoridae  and  Struthiolariidae . [9]  However, according to Simone, only  Strombus gracilior ,  Strombus alatus  and  Strombus pugilis , the  type species , remained within  Strombus . In Simone's cladogram, these three species constituted a distinct group based on at least five synapomorphies (traits that are shared by two or more  taxa  and their  most recent common ancestor ). The remaining taxa were previously considered as  subgenera , and were elevated to genus level by Simone in the end of his analysis. [9]

In a different approach, Latiolais and colleagues (2006) proposed another cladogram that attempts to show the phylogenetic relationships of 34 species within the family Strombidae. The authors analysed 31 species in the genus  Strombus  and three species in the allied genus  Lambis . The cladogram was based on  DNA  sequences of both nuclear  histone H3  and mitochondrial  cytochrome-c oxidase I  (COI) protein-coding  gene  regions. In this proposed phylogeny,  Strombus pugilis ,  Strombus alatus ,  Strombus granulatus  and  Strombus gracilior  are closely related and appear to share a  common ancestor . [3]

This  genus  of sea snails used to comprise about 50 species, [10]  38 of them occurring in the  Indo-Pacific  region. [11]  Species within the genus  Strombus  include:

Extinct species within this genus include: [5]