Coordinates :  40°11′5″N   76°43′56″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.18472°N 76.73222°W ﻿ /  40.18472; -76.73222

Swatara Creek  (nicknamed the  Swattie ) is a 72-mile-long (116 km) [1]   tributary  of the  Susquehanna River  in east central  Pennsylvania  in the  United States . It rises in the  Appalachian Mountains  in central  Schuylkill County  and passes through northwest  Lebanon Valley  before draining into the Susquehanna at  Middletown .

The name  Swatara  is said to derive from a  Susquehannock  word,  Swahadowry  or  Schaha-dawa , which means 'where we feed on eels'. [2]

Further, three water companies—United Water  [1]  , American Water  [2] , and the Lebanon Water Authority [www.lebanonauthority.org/] draw drinking water for hundreds of thousands of residents of the Swatara Watershed.

Swatara Creek rises in the  Appalachian Mountains  in central  Schuylkill County , north of the  Sharp Mountain  ridge, approximately 5 mi (8.0 km) west of  Minersville . It then flows southwest in a winding course, passing south of  Tremont , then cutting south through  Second Mountain  ridge. It passes through  Swatara State Park  then turns south to pass through  Swatara Gap  in the  Blue Mountain  ridge northwest of  Lebanon . After emerging from the ridge it flows southwest, north of  Hershey , past  Hummelstown , and joins the Susquehanna at  Middletown . It receives  Quittapahilla Creek  from the east 3 mi (4.8 km) north of  Palmyra .

The creek was a significant transportation route in the colonial period of  North America  up through the middle 19th century. The  Union Canal , an early  public works  project conceived by  William Penn  in the 1690s and begun in 1792 to connect the Susquehanna and  Delaware  rivers, followed the lower course of the river below  Union Water Works . The upper course above Union Water Works into the mountains provided the route of a feeder to the main canal, as well as providing a route to ship  anthracite  from the mountains to  Philadelphia .

On September 8, 2011, The creek reached a record height of 26.8 feet near Hershey, following devastating rains from  Tropical Storm Lee  and remnants of  Hurricane Irene , the highest since measurements began in 1975. Farther upstream at the Harpers Tavern gauge, 24.60' was recorded, making it the worst flooding since 1889. The flooding caused thousands of people to be evacuated from their homes throughout Central Pennsylvania, and at least one death. [3]

Today, the Swatara Creek  [3]  is part of a national and statewide water trail system, providing outdoor recreation and a wellness activity for families canoeing and kayaking a 60-mile segment that connects to the Susquehanna River [www.susquehannawatertrail.org/] and Captain John Smith  [4]  Water Trails.

Two ships in the  United States Navy  have been named USS  Swatara  after the creek: