Teen Titans Go!  is an American animated television series based on the  DC Comics  fictional superhero team, the  Teen Titans . The series was announced following the popularity of DC Nation's  New Teen Titans  shorts. [3] [4]

Sporting a new animation style,  Teen Titans Go!  serves as a comedic  spin-off  with no continuity to the previous series or any other media in the  DC Comics  franchise, except for some details. Many DC characters make  cameo appearances  and are referenced in the background. The original principal voice cast returns to reprise their respective roles. This series gives a sneak peek at what the Titans do when they are hanging out around the tower.

On July 28, 2016, the series was confirmed to be renewed for a fourth season, which premiered on October 20, 2016. [5]

Teen Titans Go!  is an animated series that follows the adventures of the young Titans, residing in Jump City, when they are not saving the world while living together as teenagers without adults who intrude. Unlike most of the other superhero series, the situations are comic, crazy and parodic - for example, juvenile jokes that reach new heights of danger, obtaining the license to drive after destroying the Batmobile or washing the suits after staining them when fighting their enemies. The show regularly features characters who have appeared in the original series, albeit with reduced roles and/or exaggerated personalities. It also features greater attachment to the DC Universe at large, with more references to other characters in the Justice League, plus a few appearances by Batman and Commissioner Gordon in lighthearted moments.

The show is littered with in-jokes regarding the whole of DC's library, many of them in blink-and-miss moments, as well as numerous jokes at the expense of the show itself.

Teen Titans Go!  content is planned for inclusion in the  toys-to-life  video game  Lego Dimensions  via two packs scheduled for release on September 12, 2017. These include a Team Pack containing Beast Boy and Raven mini figures and constructable T-Car and Spellbook of Azarath items; and a Fun pack containing a Starfire minifigure and constructible Titan Robot. Additionally, the pre-existing mini figures of Cyborg from  DC Comics  and Robin from  The Lego Batman Movie  will be able to turn into their Teen Titans Go! counterparts. The characters will be able to access a  Teen Titans Go! -themed Adventure World featuring locations from the series, as well as an exclusive episode themed after the game. [6]

Teen Titans Go!  received mixed reviews by critics.  Common Sense Media  gave the show 4 out of 5 stars and wrote that it "manages a few positive messages alongside the clever comedy and characterizations". [7]   IGN  writer Scott Collura gave the pilot episode a score of 7.8 out of 10, stating that "DC Animation revamps the beloved Teen Titans series for a new generation – with pretty fun results". [8]  Randy Schiff of  The Buffalo News  praised its writing and animation, calling it a "consistently quirky comedy that is often laced with keen social commentary". [9]

Writing for  Slant Magazine , Lee Wang gave the show 2 stars out of 4, saying " Teen Titans Go!  would offer little to even the most ardent Titans nostalgists and completists". [10]  Aaron Wiseman of  Moviepilot  cited various criticisms of the show, noting slight appreciation for the characters of Starfire and Raven. [11]  Joseph Murphy of the website WhatCulture deemed it an "upsetting" replacement for the cancelled television series  Young Justice . [12]

The show's pilot episode brought in over 3 million viewers. On June 11, 2013, Cartoon Network renewed  Teen Titans Go!  for a second season, citing successful ratings. [13]  According to Hope King, a tech reporter for  CNNMoney , [14]   Teen Titans Go!  was one out of three of the most viewed television shows and other media to contribute to a record setting 1.3 million simultaneous  Xfinity On-Demand  viewings during the  January 2016 United States blizzard  (also known as Winter Storm Jonas). [15]