" The Christmas Invasion " is a 60-minute special  episode  of the British  science fiction television  series  Doctor Who , which was first broadcast on 25 December 2005 in the  UK  and on  Boxing Day  2005 in  Canada . This episode features the first full-episode appearance of  David Tennant  as the  Tenth Doctor  and is also the first specially produced  Doctor Who  Christmas special  in the programme's history. In this episode, it is  Christmas , but there is little cause for celebration as planet Earth is invaded by aliens known as the Sycorax. It is up to Rose and the newly regenerated Doctor to save humanity, with a bit of help from her boyfriend Mickey and her mother Jackie.

The newly regenerated Doctor, suffering side effects from his regeneration, crash lands the  TARDIS  in London. He exits to meet Jackie Tyler and Mickey, and collapses in front of them. They take him to Jackie's flat where she puts her boyfriend's robe on him and they put him to bed. Rose and Mickey decide to go out Christmas shopping while waiting on the Doctor to recover. While shopping they are attacked by masked  Santa robots , and escape back to the flat. While attempting to wake the Doctor they are attacked by a lethal spinning  Christmas tree . The Doctor wakes suddenly, using his  sonic screwdriver  to stop the tree. He tells them that his regeneration has gone wrong and theorises that the energy of his regeneration is luring an unseen foe to him. The Doctor passes out again and is returned to bed.

Meanwhile,  Prime Minister   Harriet Jones  prepares for a live broadcast from the space probe  Guinevere One , set to land on Mars. The probe is intercepted by a giant spaceship heading for Earth. When the broadcast is shown, an alien face appears and identifies itself as being a  Sycorax . The alien demands Earth's surrender and causes a third of the world's population to go into a hypnotic state. The Sycorax threaten to make these people commit suicide unless they are given half of the world's population as slaves. One of the scientists discovers that all of the hypnotised people share the same blood type (A-positive), the same as contained in a sample on  Guinevere One . Harriet attempts further negotiations with the Sycorax, and is surprised to find herself and her staff teleported aboard the ship.

Rose, Mickey and Jackie evacuate the Doctor to the TARDIS as the Sycorax ship approaches London. Before Jackie can return with additional supplies, the TARDIS is detected by the Sycorax and is transmatted aboard their ship. Rose and Mickey exit the TARDIS, but not before spilling a container of tea on the floor that drips onto part of the TARDIS and begins to smoke. Rose attempts to bluff the leader of the Sycorax by invoking the Shadow Proclamation among other references. The Sycorax dismiss Rose and prepares to execute her, but she manages to buy enough time for the Doctor to finally recover. After smelling the tea (the  tannin  in the tea helping him recover) and waking up, he wanders out of the TARDIS still in his robe and reintroduces himself to everyone. He shuts down the Sycorax blood control and then challenges the Sycorax leader to a sword fight for the Earth. The fight spills out onto the wing of the ship, in which the Doctor's hand is severed, leading the Sycorax leader to falsely claim victory. Since the Doctor is still within the first 15 hours of regeneration he is able to re-grow his severed hand, and then forces the Sycorax leader to submit. As the Doctor and his allies return to the interior of the ship, the Sycorax leader attempts to attack the Doctor from behind. The Doctor hits a sensor with a fruit he found in his bathrobe, triggering part of the wing to fold and dropping the leader to his death.

The Doctor orders the Sycorax to leave Earth and never return before taking Rose, Mickey, and Harriet back to Earth. As the Sycorax ship moves away, Harriet orders  Torchwood  to fire on them, destroying the ship. The Doctor becomes furious with Harriet, who tries to justify her actions by reminding the Doctor that he is not always there to save them. He threatens to bring down her government with six words. Harriet firmly stands behind her decision, and the Doctor walks over to her aide and whispers: "Don't you think she looks tired?" That evening, the Doctor selects a new outfit from the TARDIS wardrobe and joins Rose, Jackie, and Mickey for Christmas dinner. They watch Harriet Jones on the television fending off rumours about her health and a pending  vote of no confidence . The Doctor and Rose then prepare to set off again in the TARDIS.

The Doctor subconsciously ends up quoting " Circle of Life " from  The Lion King  whilst confronting the leader of the Sycorax.

After winning the fight against the Sycorax leader, the Doctor says "Not bad for a man in his jim jams...very  Arthur Dent ", referring to the character from  Douglas Adams's  series  The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy . Adams was a script editor and writer for Doctor Who during the  Fourth Doctor 's era.

This special was the first full episode starring  David Tennant  as the Tenth Doctor; he was only shown briefly at the end of " The Parting of the Ways " for the regeneration sequence. A  7-minute "mini-episode" , set between "The Parting of the Ways" and "The Christmas Invasion", was shown as part of the  Children in Need  charity  telethon  on 18 November 2005. The Christmas special is a tradition in British television series. While this is the first story for  Doctor Who  clearly labelled as a Christmas special, the seventh episode of  The Daleks' Master Plan , titled  "The Feast of Steven" , was written as a Christmas episode, even featuring a  fourth wall -breaking Christmas wish to the viewers by  William Hartnell . [1]  Although not shown at Christmas, " The Unquiet Dead " was set on Christmas Eve, 1869. [2]

The Tenth Doctor speaks with an  Estuary English  accent, in contrast to the  Ninth Doctor 's  Northern one . In a 23 December interview on  BBC Radio 1 , Tennant explained that a line had been scripted for the Christmas special explaining that the newly regenerated Doctor had imprinted on Rose's accent, "like a chick hatching from an egg," but the line was cut from the final programme. He also briefly affects an  American Appalachian  accent (when he regrows his hand and continues his fight with the Sycorax leader, he claims his hand is a "fightin' hand" in that accent).

The episode's opening shot is a repeat of the opening shot of " Rose ", using a new arrangement of the same music. [ citation needed ]  The cone-shaped building which has all its glass blown out from the ship's shockwave is  30 St Mary Axe , also known as the Swiss Re Building or "The Gherkin". [ citation needed ]  The climactic scenes of the episode were shot on location at Wallis House,  Brentford , one of the  Golden Mile 's few remaining  Art Deco  buildings. [ citation needed ]  Parts of the episode were filmed at the  Clearwell Caves  in  Gloucestershire . [3]  The prototype of the Sycorax swords was auctioned on  eBay  to raise funds for the  Great Ormond Street Hospital  Children's Charity. [4]  It raised £920.51. [5]  During the live broadcast, the front page of the official BBC website stated: "THE CHRISTMAS INVASION is on BBC One NOW. HARRIET JONES SAYS: Switch this website off for Britain." [6]  The tie-in website "Who is Doctor Who?" was also updated with a message from Mickey referencing the Guinevere One website, and an appeal to  the Doctor  to bring back Rose. [7]

The song playing during the wardrobe sequence, "Song for Ten" (named in reference to the Tenth Doctor), was composed by  Murray Gold  for the episode and sung by  Tim Phillips . [8]  The closing credits had a new theme arrangement restoring the traditional  "middle eight"  section of the theme which had been omitted in the 2005 series. This was performed by the  BBC National Orchestra of Wales , conducted by Gold. This arrangement was subsequently used for the closing titles of the 2006 series. [9]

Various pieces of music featured in this episode were released in December 2006 as part of the  Doctor Who  Soundtrack  (produced by Silva Screen). These included the "Song for Ten", the music played behind Harriet Jones' speech and the music played as the spaceship arrives over London.

Lachele Carl  reappears as the reporter seen in " Aliens of London " / " World War Three ". She is later seen in " The Sound of Drums ", [10]  " The Poison Sky ", [11]  " Turn Left ", [12]  " The Stolen Earth " [13]  and  The Sarah Jane Adventures  story  Revenge of the Slitheen . [14]

Overnight ratings for the episode gave a peak viewing audience of 9.8 million viewers, and an average of 9.4 — the second highest rated programme of the evening, behind  EastEnders . [15]  This episode was the highest-rated episode of the  Tenth Doctor  era, with final ratings at 9.84 million, up until the " Voyage of the Damned ", which achieved an audience of 13.8 million viewers. It is considered one of the best Christmas specials of the show. In 2014, over 7000 readers of  Radio Times  voted "The Christmas Invasion" as the greatest  Doctor Who  Christmas special with over a quarter of the votes going to it, 24.92%, a whole 10% more votes than the second favourite. [16]

Immediately after "The Christmas Invasion",  digital  viewers were able to press their  red button  to view a special interactive episode, " Attack of the Graske " written by  Gareth Roberts  and starring Tennant as the Doctor.

The Canadian presentation on the  CBC  on 26 December 2005 was hosted by Piper, who was attired for the occasion in a red  Roots  "Canada" sweatshirt. The episode was scheduled in a 90-minute-long slot; as the episode and the presentations took less than the allotted time, the rest of the broadcast was filled with the start of two episodes of the animated programme  Creature Comforts , which was set for the following 30-minute slot. The special premiered on  BBC America  in 2007. Unlike the Sci-Fi version, the episode was edited down to fit inside a one-hour timeslot with commercial breaks.

This episode was released together with " New Earth " as a basic  DVD  with no special features on 1 May 2006, and as part of a second series  boxset  on 20 November 2006. This release included an in-vision  commentary  with Russell T Davies,  Julie Gardner  (Head of Drama for  BBC Wales ) and Phil Collinson, recorded before the story aired. This commentary was also made available as an  MP3  on the BBC  Doctor Who  website. [17]

The ten Christmas specials between "The Christmas Invasion" and " Last Christmas " inclusive were released in a boxset titled  Doctor Who – The 10 Christmas Specials  on 19 October 2015. [18]

On 3 December 2005, the annual  Christmas  edition of the BBC's  listings magazine   Radio Times  was released,  featuring a  Doctor Who  cover  to tie-in with "The Christmas Invasion". [19]  This was the first time  Doctor Who  had featured on the Christmas edition cover in the show's forty-two-year history, and the first Christmas cover for an individual BBC television drama since  EastEnders  in 1986. The Christmas  Radio Times  cover usually features artwork of a generic Christmas scene. As confirmed by Russell T Davies in the episode commentary, the  Doctor Who  section of that issue of the  Radio Times  contains a hidden message explaining what saves the Doctor: many of the paragraphs in the articles have an oversized first letter, which taken consecutively spell out "A cup of tea" (in the manner of an  acrostic ).