Theresa Oswald , is a politician in  Manitoba ,  Canada . She was a  New Democratic Party  member of the  Legislative Assembly of Manitoba  from 2003 to 2016 and a cabinet minister from 2004 until she stepped down in 2014 to unsuccessfully challenged Premier  Greg Selinger  for the party's leadership.

Oswald was born and raised in the  St. Vital  neighbourhood of  Winnipeg , Manitoba, and was a teacher and school administrator for fifteen years before entering politics. She initially taught English, later serving as vice-principal at  Victor Mager School, Winnipeg  in the Louis Riel Division. In the latter capacity, she frequently worked with children and families who arrived in Canada from war-ravaged countries. Oswald has also been involved in local groups such as the Victoria Hospital, the Zoological Society of Manitoba and Take Pride Winnipeg!.

Oswald was part of the NDP's historic breakthrough in south-end Winnipeg in the  provincial election of 2003 , defeating incumbent  Progressive Conservative   Louise Dacquay  in the riding of  Seine River , 4,314 votes to 3,582. The NDP had never won this riding before. Oswald's campaign focused on greater access to post-secondary education and a tuition freeze for university students.

In August 2004, Oswald was appointed to lead a task-force committee looking for ways to encourage physical activity in the province's youth.

Oswald was appointed as a  cabinet minister  in  Gary Doer 's government on October 12, 2004, serving as the Minister responsible for  Healthy Living ,  Seniors  and  Healthy Child Manitoba . In 2006, she was promoted to  Minister of Health , [1]  where she introduced bold new initiatives such as making a family doctor available to every Manitoban, new investments in women's and maternal health, promoted organ donation and introduced groundbreaking legislation to require life-saving heart defibrillators in public places. Her work to improve cancer care, including making all cancer drugs available to patients at no charge, was celebrated by the Canadian Cancer Society with a Diamond Jubilee medal.

She was re-elected with an increased majority in the  2007 provincial election .

In 2013 she was again promoted to lead the government's new flagship department of Jobs and the Economy, where she has since focused on expanding access to training programs to help increase the supply of skilled workers, expanded supports for start-ups and young entrepreneurs and introduced a boost to housing benefits for those on social assistance and the working poor.

Oswald resigned her cabinet position on November 3, 2014 along with  Jennifer Howard ,  Erin Selby ,  Stan Struthers , and  Andrew Swan  due to concerns about Premier Selinger's leadership. [2]  On December 21, 2014, Oswald declared her candidacy for the  party leadership . [3]  Oswald was defeated by a margin of 33 votes on the second ballot at the leadership convention on March 8, 2015 by Selinger. [4]  Oswald remained an MLA after her defeat but did not run for re-election as an MLA in the  2016 provincial election . [5]

[6]