The Robocop Kraus  are a  post-punk revival / indie rock  band from  Nuremberg ,  Germany .

The Robocop Kraus formed in 1998 with Thomas Lang as lead singer and on guitar, Matthias Wendl on guitar, Johannes Uschalt on drums, and Roman Maul on bass. Maul left before the release of a split EP with The Cherryville on Swing Deluxe records, Lang and Uschalt's record company. Tobias Helmlinger replaced Maul on bass and Markus Steckert joined in on keyboards and organ. After touring with Yage, The Robocop Kraus followed their split EP with The Cherryville up with their first full-length album in 1999 entitled  Inferno Nihilistique 2000 , again, on Swing Deluxe. The band toured Germany, France, and Spain in support of  Inferno Nihilistique 2000 .

In 2001, the band released their second album and first worldwide release  Tiger  on  Day After Records , a Czech record label. They toured in support of  Tiger  throughout Germany, France, Holland, the Czech Republic, Poland, England, and Ireland with  The World/Inferno Friendship Society  and Yage. A year later, The Robocop Kraus released  As Long As We Dance We Are Not Dead , a two CD collection of rarities including songs from  The Robocop Kraus/The Cherryville  split EP. They hooked up with  The World/Inferno Friendship Society  and  The Independents  once more for a US tour and followed that up with another tour across Japan in 2002.

2003 saw the release of their third album  Living With Other People  on L'Âge d'or.

After Hans Christian Fuss replaced Johannes Uschalt on drums, The Robocop Kraus began recording their fourth studio album  They Think They Are The Robocop Kraus  in February 2005 at Grōndahl Studios with Pelle Gunnerfeldt. They released  They Think They Are The Robocop Kraus  in Germany on June 20, 2005 followed by a European wide release on September 5, 2005.

On February 2006,  They Think They Are The Robocop Kraus  was released in the US and The Robocop Kraus went on tour with  Art Brut  in support of this album.