The Unborn  is a 2009 American  supernatural   horror film  written and directed by  David S. Goyer . The film stars  Odette Yustman  as a young woman who is tormented by a  dybbuk  and seeks help from a rabbi ( Gary Oldman ). The dybbuk seeks to use her death as a gateway to physical existence. [3] [4]  The film is produced by  Michael Bay  and his  production company   Platinum Dunes . It was released in American theaters on January 9, 2009, by  Rogue Pictures .

Casey Beldon has nightmarish hallucinations of strange-looking dogs in the neighborhood and an evil child with bright blue eyes following her around. While  babysitting  Matty, her neighbor's son, she finds him showing his infant sibling its reflection in a mirror. Matty attacks Casey, smashing the mirror on her head, and tells her: "Jumby wants to be born now". She puts him to bed and leaves in shock.

Casey's friend Romy tells her of a  superstition  that newborns should not see their reflections in the mirror for at least a year because otherwise they will die soon. Casey's eyes begin to change color; a doctor asks if she is a twin, and explains the change as  tetragametic chimerism  and  heterochromia , and that it is completely normal. Her neighbor's infant dies, supporting the superstition.

Casey's father admits that she had a twin brother years ago who died while he was in the womb when  her umbilical cord strangled him , and whom he and Casey's mother had nicknamed "Jumby". She begins to suspect that the spirit is haunting her and this is the soul of her dead twin wanting to be born so it can enter the world of the living as evil.

Casey meets Sofi Kozma—whom she later learns is her grandmother—who explains that as a child she had a twin brother who died during  Nazi experiments  in  Auschwitz  during  World War II . A  dybbuk  brought the brother back to life to use as a portal into the world of the living. Kozma killed her twin to stop the spirit, and now it haunts her family for revenge, which is why Casey's mother became insane and committed suicide.

Kozma gives Casey a  hamsa  amulet for protection, instructs her to destroy all mirrors and burn the shards, and refers her to  Rabbi  Joseph Sendak, who can perform a Jewish  exorcism  to remove the dybbuk out of her soul. Sendak does not believe Casey's story until he sees a dog with its head twisted upside down in his  synagogue . The dybbuk kills Kozma and, soon after, Romy. Casey and her boyfriend Mark—who both see the spirit after it kills Romy—realize that it is getting stronger.

Sendak, Mark,  Episcopal priest  Arthur Wyndham, and other volunteers begin the exorcism, but the dybbuk attacks them and several are wounded or killed. The spirit, having possessed the priest, chases Casey and Mark. Mark knocks Wyndham unconscious but gets possessed. Casey stabs Mark in the neck with the amulet; Sendak arrives and he and Casey complete the exorcism. The rite draws the dybbuk out of the human world, but Mark falls and dies during the separation.

Casey mourns her boyfriend but still wonders why the dybbuk became suddenly active in her life now, and why it didn't attack her earlier. She takes a pregnancy test, and learns that she is pregnant by Mark, with twins.

In the United States,  The Unborn  opened at the third position, grossing $19,810,585 averaging $8,405 at 2,357 sites. [5]  It spent only eight weeks in release, and had a final gross of $42,670,410. [2]  Worldwide, the film grossed $76,710,644.

The film received largely negative reviews from critics. Review aggregation website  Rotten Tomatoes  gives the film a rating of 10% based on 115 reviews, with the site's consensus stating: "David Goyer's  Unborn  is a tame genre effort with cheap thrills and scares that border on silliness." [6]   Metacritic  gave the film a 30 out of 100, based on reviews from 16 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". [7]

The  film score  for  The Unborn  was composed by  Ramin Djawadi . The  soundtrack album  was released on February 24, 2009 via  Lakeshore Records  label. [8]

The Unborn  was released on  region 1   DVD  and  Blu-ray  July 7, 2009 [9]  and on June 22, 2009 in Region 2. [10]  The DVD includes both the theatrical version (88 minutes) and the unrated cut (89 minutes), as well as  deleted scenes . The Blu-ray release contains the DVD features plus two exclusive  BD Live  features.