Tim Kelsey  is chief executive of the new Australian Digital Health Agency which is responsible for all national digital health services and systems, with a focus on engagement, innovation and clinical quality and safety. Australian Minister for Health  Sussan Ley  announced the appointment in August 2016. [1]  He was previously the first National Director for Patients and Information in  NHS England . The role - which he served between 2012-15 - combined the functions of chief technology and information officer with responsibility for patient and public participation and communications. [2]

Before his appointment in July 2012, he was the  United Kingdom  government's Executive Director of  Transparency  and  Open Data  leading on the development of national public data policy. [3] [4] [5]

He was appointed National Information Director in health and care and chair, the National Information Board, in April 2014. [6]

He started his career as a journalist who went on to co-found  Dr Foster  in 2000, [7]  the organisation which internationally pioneered publication of comparative hospital death rates and other measures of health quality. The Department of Health's acquisition of 50% of Dr Foster in 2006 was strongly criticised by the House of Commons  Public Accounts Committee , which described it as "favouritism" [8]  and a "hole and corner deal". [9]

Kelsey has become a leading activist for transparency and digital empowerment in public services. [10]  He was appointed visiting professor at the Institute of Global Health Innovation, Imperial College London in November 2015  [11]  and is co-author with Roger Taylor of "Transparency and the Open Society", which makes the case for transparency in public services and argues that it improves social and economic equity. It was published in June 2016 by  Policy Press  and the  University of Chicago . [12]

In 2007, Kelsey was the architect and launch programme director of  NHS Choices . He has also worked for Telstra, the Australian telecoms company, and for McKinsey & Co  [13]

Kelsey was born on 7 May 1965. He was educated at  Wellington College , Berkshire, between 1978 and 1983. In 1984 he won an Exhibition to study history at  Magdalene College, Cambridge . After graduating in 1987, Kelsey worked as a freelance newspaper and radio journalist in  Turkey  and  Iraq  for  The Independent ,  BBC  and  The Sunday Telegraph . His investigation into illicit kidney trafficking between Istanbul and London in 1989 triggered a change in British law. He also documented the use of  chemical weapons  against civilians during Saddam Hussein's campaign against the  Kurds  in northern  Iraq  in a series of articles in  The Independent . [14]  He joined the launch staff of  The Independent on Sunday  in 1989 and covered the 1990  Gulf War  as a combat pool reporter with British forces. During this period he also presented a number of TV documentaries including "Frontline" for  Channel 4  (1994), a documentary in which he escorted Queenie Fletcher, mother of murdered policewoman  Yvonne Fletcher  to confront Col Gadaffi in Libya [15] [16]  and "You Only Live Once" for the  BBC  (1996), an investigation into anti-ageing science. [17]  In 1995 he joined the  Sunday Times  and became deputy editor of the Insight Team before being appointed news editor in 1998. Kelsey is author of  Dervish: The Invention of Modern Turkey , a portrait of the country in the mid-1990s which was published by  Hamish Hamilton  in 1996 and  Penguin Books  the following year.  Jan Morris , the noted travel writer, commented in her jacket review: 'An excellent travel book, offering startling and vivid insights, social, historical and political, into a Turkey that most visitors can hardly imagine.' Others described it as 'dystopian' and 'no standard travel narrative'. [18]

In 1999, Kelsey, then news editor at the  Sunday Times , founded Dr Foster with Roger Taylor, a former  Financial Times  journalist, and Roger Killen, a  Stanford  graduate. The organisation was set up to promote information on the quality of local health services to patients and the public. Kelsey explained his motives in an article in the  New Statesman  magazine in 2001. [19]

In 2001, Dr Foster – named after an English nursery rhyme character - published the first annual Good Hospital Guide in the Sunday Times. It revealed widespread variation in adjusted death rates between English hospitals and was the first time such a comparative measure of quality had been published for a national health economy. The methodology was developed by Prof Sir Brian Jarman, director of the Dr Foster Unit at  Imperial College , London. [20]  It prompted widespread media interest [21]  and stimulated a national debate over quality in healthcare.  Alan Milburn  MP, then secretary of state for health, told the BBC in response to the publication: "The NHS has acted like a secret society. It has to recognise that people now expect to be treated like consumers". [22]

The Dr Foster Hospital Guide  is published annually and remains an important independent publication on quality in  National Health Service  (NHS) hospitals. In 2011, it identified a number of underperforming hospitals in England and a higher risk of avoidable mortality at the weekend. [23] [24]

Since 2001, Kelsey has overseen publication of a series of similar consumer guides to individual hospital consultants, [25]  maternity services, [26]  and complementary therapists [27]  among others. [28]

Kelsey was chief executive of Dr Foster between 2000 and 2006 during which time it was reported the 9th fastest growing private company in the UK by the  Sunday Times . [29]  In 2006, a public body - the NHS Information Centre - purchased 50% of the company and Kelsey became chair of the Executive Board of the new organisation – Dr Foster Intelligence. This public sector investment in a private company was criticised by the  National Audit Office  on the grounds that it had not been put out to tender. [30]  Besides publishing information to the public, Dr Foster Intelligence also provides analytic services to around 85% of NHS hospitals in England and works with health organisations in Europe and the US.

In 2008, Kelsey won the HealthInvestor award for Outstanding Contribution as an Individual to Healthcare for his work with Dr Foster. [31]

In 2006 he was appointed to design the NHS online information service, NHS Choices, by the  UK Department of Health . The project, an online information service which publishes comparative data on NHS performance and is designed to promote greater patient choice in healthcare, launched in 2007. [32]

Kelsey was a trustee of the Nuffield Trust, a leading British policy think tank, [33]  and a commissioner of the 2020 Public Services Trust. [34]  He chaired the 2020 public technology group which published a report arguing for more transparency in public services – Online or Inline – in March 2010. [35]

In 2009, Kelsey was appointed a lay member of the National Quality Board of the NHS. [36]

Kelsey left Dr Foster in May 2010 and joined  McKinsey & Co  where he led development of information strategies in international public services, based in London.

The circumstances of the £12m joint venture between Dr Foster, the company co-founded by Tim Kelsey, and the Department of Health, were criticised in an official report from the  National Audit Office , following a report by an anonymous whistleblower who raised concerns about the legality of the arrangement. [37] [38]

The acquisition was strongly criticised by the House of Commons  Public Accounts Committee . Committee chair  Edward Leigh  commented “The seeming degree of favouritism in the choice of company and the haste with which the deal was concluded show a disregard for the rules governing the use of public money”. Leigh described the Department of Health's acquisition of 50% of Dr Foster as a “hole and corner deal" and said the department may have paid some £4m more than its share was worth. [39]  He also claimed that of the £12m paid by the DoH, £7.6m “went straight into the pockets of Dr Foster’s shareholders”. [40]

However, the Department and the NHS Information Centre disputed the findings of the NAO, stating: 'Dr Foster Ltd clearly represented the best possible prospect for a joint venture, given the benefits they were seeking to attain... to harness private sector dynamism, efficiency and effectiveness to public sector expertise in the health informatics field'. The Department of Health said it 'acted on advice given by its Commercial Directorate and legal and professional advisers'. [41]

In 2008, the former head of the NHS Information Centre, statistician  Denise Lievesley , claimed to an employment tribunal that she had been made a "scapegoat" for the Dr Foster deal in 2007 despite repeatedly highlighting concerns about the joint venture's worth. Lievesley also raised concerns about Dr Foster's use of data, including examples with "grave" potential to mislead the public. [42]  Lievesley lost her case.

In May 2011, Kelsey was asked by the British government to direct national policy on Transparency which is core to Prime Minister  David Cameron 's vision for public service reform. [43] [44] [45]  In January 2012, he left McKinsey to take up a full-time post as Britain's first Executive Director of Transparency and Open Data, based in the  Cabinet Office . In February 2012, he was named by the British thinktank  Reform  a Reformer of the Year. [46]

Kelsey argues that Transparency has the potential to enhance accountability, choice, productivity, and quality of service delivery; transform citizen participation in government; and drive economic growth. [47] [48] " In a series of key policy announcements in 2011 - the Prime Minister's letter on Transparency to the Cabinet in July, [49]  the Open Data Consultation, [50]  and the Chancellor's Autumn Statement, [51]  the UK committed to release of new data across government including health, education, transport and criminal justice. Kelsey led the development of 'Unleasing the Potential' - the White Paper on Open Data - which was published in June 2012. [52]  This articulated the UK government's intention to move to a 'presumption of publication' for public data in machine-readable formats for free re-use. The Observer said it marked a 'new era in Open Data', [53]  while the UK Information commissioner said it marked a 'step change in transparency'. [54]  Announcements included publication of new datasets across Whitehall, the adoption of a core set of public data principles and the re-launch of data.gov.uk as a more comprehensive tool for data extraction. In April 2012, the UK became co-chair with Brazil of the  Open Government Partnership , [55]  a global initiative involving more than 50 nations and international civil society to promote transparency and citizen participation.

On 24 May 2012 it was announced that Tim Kelsey would return to the  NHS , taking up the role of National Director for Patients and Information at  NHS England [56]  Kelsey said in an interview that his focus in this role - which combines leadership of the technology, information and public engagement functions of the NHS - is to put transparency and public participation at the centre of a transformation of customer service in health and social care. [57]

He was said by the Health Service Journal to be the seventeenth most powerful person in the English NHS in December 2013. [58]  In 2014,  The Sunday Times  listed Kelsey one of the 500 most influential people in Britain  [59]  As of 2015, Kelsey was paid a salary of between £180,000 and £184,999 by NHS England, making him one of the 328 most highly paid people in the British public sector at that time. [60]

In April 2014, Kelsey was appointed National Information Director in health and care and chair of the National Information Board by the  Department of Health  in addition to his role at NHS England. [61]  The National Information Board brings together all national health and care bodies, together with local government, clinical leaders and civil society members to set data and technology priorities in health and care and advise the Department and Secretary of State accordingly. It also advises the secretary of state on the quality of data transparency in the NHS. In October 2014 the  Five Year Forward View  stated that 'harnessing the information revolution' was a key priority for improved quality and cost effectiveness in the NHS. It identified the NIB as the body responsible for leading transformation in digital services for patients, citizens and professionals - including full real time interoperability of patient records by 2020. In November 2014, the NIB published  Personalised Health and Care 2020: A Framework for Action   [62]  which detailed these information priorities. The proposals - which were published as formal government policy after Cabinet clearance - include providing patients with comprehensive access to all their medical records by 2018 and the ability to 'write into' them, establishing an NHS endorsement scheme for third party digital services and apps, giving citizens access to new online digital health services, and mandating safe digital record keeping - including patient and drug barcoding - in all NHS providers. [63]   The Times  reported: 'Patients will be able to view test results and book appointments online under “radical” plans to make accessing the NHS as simple as online banking.' [64]