Todd Arlan Lickliter  (born April 17, 1955) is a college basketball coach who is currently a regional personnel scout for the  Boston Celtics  of the  NBA . [1]  He was previously the head coach of  Marian University , the  University of Iowa , and  Butler University  men's  basketball  teams. [2]  He spent the 2011-12 season as an assistant coach at  Miami (Ohio) .

Lickliter was a starting point guard at  North Central High School  in Indianapolis, where he played for his father, Arlan. He helped North Central to a sectional title in  Hinkle Fieldhouse  in 1973, and he played his final high school game in the Fieldhouse in the 1974 sectional semifinals. Following his high school graduation, he enrolled at the  University of North Carolina at Wilmington  (UNCW) but wound up transferring to  Central Florida Community College . He played one season at Central Florida, earning an associate degree in 1977, and then transferred to Butler, where he played his final two collegiate seasons, 1977-79. He earned a B.S. degree in secondary education from Butler in 1979.

Lickliter began his collegiate coaching career at  Butler University  in 1988-89 under his former college coach, Joe Sexson. He left the Bulldogs after a year to accept a head coaching job at  Danville High School  in  Danville, Indiana , where he remained for three seasons. He returned to the collegiate ranks in 1996 as an administrative assistant on  Barry Collier's  staff. Lickliter accepted an assistant coaching position at  Eastern Michigan  in 1997 and remained on the Eagles' staff for two seasons, before returning to Butler in 1999. In six  NCAA Division I  seasons, he contributed to teams that won three conference regular season championships, four conference tournament titles, made four  NCAA Tournament  appearances, and compiled a 106-73 record.

Lickliter played a prominent role in refining Butler's basketball system during his stint as assistant coach to Collier and  Thad Matta . During his three seasons on the staff of the two former head coaches, the Bulldogs had three 20-win seasons, won three conference regular season titles, three league tournament crowns and three trips to the NCAA Tournament. In his final two seasons as a Butler assistant coach, the Bulldogs compiled a 47-18 record, including "Top 25" wins over #10  Wisconsin  and #23  Wake Forest . The win over the Demon Deacons in the 2001 NCAA Men's Basketball Championship was Butler's first NCAA tournament win in 39 years.

In May 2001 Lickliter was named Butler University's 20th men's head basketball coach, replacing  Thad Matta , who accepted the same position at  Xavier University . During his first season, Lickliter led the Bulldogs to a then-school record 26 victories and third consecutive  Horizon League  regular season championship. They also cracked the  Associated Press  Top 25 rankings for the first time in 53 years. The following year the Bulldogs surpassed their previous season's win total, finishing 27-6. Lickliter's 53 wins during the first two years of his head coaching career rank third best in Division I history, behind  Bill Guthridge  (58 wins) of  North Carolina  and  Everett Case  (55 wins) of  North Carolina State . During his six years as head coach, he owned the top three single-season win totals in Butler basketball history and led the Bulldogs to the postseason four times, including two appearances in the NCAA Sweet 16. In April 2007, the  National Association of Basketball Coaches  named Lickliter the National Coach of the Year. [3]  CollegeHoops.net also named Lickliter the High-Major Coach of the Year. [4]

Lickliter was introduced as the head coach at the University of Iowa on April 3, 2007 replacing  Steve Alford . Iowa and Lickliter agreed to a 7-year deal at a salary of $1.2 million per year. [5]  At the end of his 3rd year at Iowa, Lickliter was fired for poor performance.

Lickliter returned to his hometown of Indianapolis, accepting the head coaching job at Marian University on June 6, 2012. [6]

In his second season, Lickliter led the Knights to their most conference wins in school history (12). The Knights ended their season ranked #1 in NAIA Division II in Scoring Defense per Game (57.958), #1 in NAIA Division II in Turnover Margin (6.292), and #4 in NAIA Division II in Assist/Turnover Ratio (1.558).  [7]

Notable coaches who have played for or coached under Todd Lickliter:

Brad Stevens  - Current Boston Celtics head coach and former Butler University Head Coach

Brandon Miller  - Former head men's basketball coach at Butler University

Matthew Graves  - Current head men's basketball coach at South Alabama

LaVall Jordan  - Current head men's basketball coach at Butler University

Jeff Meyer  - Current assistant men's basketball coach at the Butler University

Chad Walthall  - Current head men's basketball Coach at Minnesota State University, Moorhead

National champion            Postseason invitational champion   
        Conference regular season champion            Conference regular season and conference tournament champion 
        Division regular season champion          Division regular season and conference tournament champion 
        Conference tournament champion

Lickliter and his wife, Joez, have three sons, Ry, Garrett and John, and three daughters-in-law, Magdalena, Molly, and Leah. [9]  Ry graduated from Marian University in 2006 and Garrett graduated in 2007. John, a 2012 graduate of Marian University, is an assistant coach for the Marian University Men's Basketball program. [10]