Transposition of the great vessels  ( TGV ) is a group of  congenital   heart defects  involving an abnormal spatial arrangement of any of the  great vessels :  superior  and/or  inferior   venae cavae ,  pulmonary artery ,  pulmonary veins , and  aorta . Congenital heart diseases involving only the primary  arteries  (pulmonary artery and aorta) belong to a sub-group called  transposition of the great arteries .

Transposed  vessels can present a large variety of  atriovenous ,  ventriculoarterial  and/or  arteriovenous   discordance . The effects may range from a change in  blood pressure  to an interruption in  circulation , depending on the nature and degree of the misplacement and which vessels are involved.

Although "transposed" literally means "swapped", many types of TGV involve vessels that are in abnormal positions, while not actually being swapped with each other. The terms TGV and TGA are most commonly used in reference to  dextro-TGA  – in which the arteries  are  in swapped positions; however, both terms are also commonly used, though to a slightly lesser extent, in reference to  levo-TGA  – in which both the arteries and the  ventricles  are swapped; while other defects in this category are almost never referred to by either of these terms.

In  dextro-Transposition of the great arteries  (dextro-TGA) deoxygenated blood from the right heart is pumped immediately through the aorta and circulated to the body and the heart itself, bypassing the lungs altogether, while the left heart pumps oxygenated blood continuously back into the lungs through the pulmonary artery. In effect, two separate " circular " (parallel) circulatory systems are created. It is called a  cyanotic congenital heart defect  (CHD) because the newborn infant turns blue from lack of oxygen.

Levo-Transposition of the great arteries is an  acyanotic  heart defect in which the primary arteries are transposed, with the aorta anterior and to the left of the pulmonary artery, and the morphological left and right ventricles with their corresponding  atrioventricular valves  are also transposed. The systemic and the  pulmonary circulation  are connected. Complications arise from the fact that the right ventricle, which is adapted for pumping blood into the low pressure pulmonary circulation, is being tasked with pumping blood at a much higher pressure against the high resistance of the  systemic circulation .

In many cases, TGV is accompanied by other heart defects, the most common type being  intracardiac   shunts  such as  atrial septal defect  including  patent foramen ovale ,  ventricular septal defect , and  patent ductus arteriosus .  Stenosis , or other defects, of  valves  and/or  vessels  may also be present.

When no other heart defects are present it is called 'simple' TGV; when other defects are present it is called 'complex' TGV.

Preexisting  diabetes mellitus  of a pregnant mother is a risk factor that has been described for the fetus having TGV. [1]

On  chest X-ray , transposition of the great vessels typically shows a cardio- mediastinal  silhouette appearing as an " egg on a string ", wherein in which the  enlarged heart  represents an egg on its side and the narrowed,  atrophic   thymus  of the superior mediastinum represents the string. [2]

For newborns with transposition,  prostaglandins  can be given to keep the  ductus arteriosus   open  which allows mixing of the otherwise isolated pulmonary and systemic circuits. Thus oxygenated blood that recirculates back to the lungs can mix with blood that circulates throughout the body. The  arterial switch  operation is the definitive treatment for dextro- transposition. Rarely the arterial switch is not feasible due to particular  coronary artery  anatomy and an  atrial switch  operation is preferred.

TGV was first described in 1797 by  Matthew Baillie . [3]