Uintascorpio halandrasi

Uintascorpio  is an extinct  genus  of  scorpion  in the family  Buthidae  and containing the  single  species  Uintascorpio halandrasorum . [1]  The species is known only from the  Middle Eocene  Parachute Member, part of the  Green River Formation , in the Piceance Creek Basin,  Garfield County , northwestern  Colorado , USA. [1]

Uintascorpio halandrasorum  is known only from one fossil, the  holotype , specimen number "DMNH No. 6004". The specimen is composed of a single entire adult that is preserved as a  compression fossil  in finely bedded, light gray  shale . The fossil was recovered by Gus and Christine Halandras of  Meeker, Colorado  from outcrops of the  Green River Formations  Parachute Member exposing sediments of  Lake Unitah ,  Rio Blanco County, Colorado , USA. [1]  The type specimen is currently preserved in the  paleoentomology collections  housed in the  Denver Museum of Nature and Science , located in  Denver , Colorado, USA.  Uintascorpio  was first studied by M. L. Perry with his 1995 brief description  type description  of the genus and species being published in a Grand Junction Geological Society publication. [2]  The  generic  name was coined by Perry as a combination of the Latin "scorpio" for scorpion, and "Uintah" referring to Lake Uintah of the Green River Formation. The  etymology  of the  specific epithet   halandrasorum  is in recognition of Gus and Christine Halandras. [1]  The species name was originally spelled  halandrasi  by Perry, however, per the naming regulations in the  International Code of Zoological Nomenclature , the species name was corrected to  halandrasorum  in the 2004 redescription of  Uintascorpio . [1]

When  Uintascorpio halandrasorum  was described, Perry placed the genus tentatively into the family  Vaejovidae . This placement was not followed, however by later authors who mentioned the genus. [1]  The genus was suggested to be a member of Buthidae in a 1998 by Kovařík and possibly a synonym of the modern genus  Rhopalurus . Papers in 2001 and 2003 left the genus as " Orthosternina   incertae sedis " due to the limited nature of the type description and its illustrations. [1]  The  Uintascorpio halandrasorum  was redescribed in 2004 by Jorge Santiago-Blay, Michael Soleglad, and Victor Fet. In the redescription the placement of  Uintascorpio  into Buthidae was confirmed, but the synonymy with  Rhopalurus  as suggested by Kovařík was not. [1]

The  U. halandrasorum  type specimen is a well-preserved complete adult shown in dorsal view. The specimen is 25.25 millimetres (0.994 in) in preserved length with an estimated total length of 39.25 millimetres (1.545 in). [1]  The specimen has a general  coloration  of brown tones, with the main carapace,  mesosoma , and  metasoma  being a slightly darker tone than the  pedipalps  and legs. The tips of the cheliceral fingers are a dark brown, as is the articulation mechanism on patellae of leg IV. [1]