Vive Crop Protection  is a privately held company based in  Toronto , Canada, that develops new products based on existing active ingredients for  crop protection  using its patented Allosperse technology. The company has offices, laboratories and manufacturing facilities in the  Discovery District  of downtown Toronto and biology facilities in  Guelph , Ontario.

The company was founded out of the Department of Chemistry at the  University of Toronto  in 2006 by Prof. M. Cynthia Goh and co-developers of Vive’s technology, Dr. Darren Anderson, Dr. Jordan Dinglasan, Dr. Jane Goh and Dr. Richard Loo. Dr. Anderson was the founding President and is currently the Chief Communications Officer and VP Regulatory of Vive. Dr. Dinglasan developed the company’s core technology and is currently the Product Development Manager at Vive.

Vive has received continuous funding since its inception, from the Ontario Centres of Excellence’s Accelerator Fund,  Sustainable Development Technology Canada , the  Ministry of Research and Innovation (Ontario) ’s Innovation Demonstration Fund and FedDev as well as internal and external private investors.

Vive's Allosperse was Highly Commended at the 2012 Agrow Awards for Best Formulation Innovation (shortlisted in this category in 2011).

In 2010, Vive was Named One of Canada's Top 10, and also was awarded the Frost & Sullivan 2010 North American Technology of the Year Award for its encapsulation technology.

Vive was awarded a  Deloitte  Technology Green 15 award in 2009. The award recognizes Canada’s leading green technology companies that promote a "more efficient use and re-use of the earth's resources in industrial production and consumption". [1]

Vive was awarded top prize in the Clean 15 Canadian Clean Technology Competition of 2009 in addition to being named one of Canada’s Cleantech Next 10 Emerging leaders by  Corporate Knights .

The company has also been featured in a number of articles by various media outlets, including Canadian Business Magazine, [2]  the Globe and Mail, [3]  the Toronto Star  [4]  and various University of Toronto publications. [5]

Vive's primary focus is developing fertilizer-compatible products for at-plant application of crop protection and fertilizer simultaneously. Vive is also developing new soil-applied products with controlled mobility in soil, as well as new seed treatment products. Vive's core technology is called the Allosperse delivery system. Allosperse is a water-dispersible polymer-based delivery system.