The  Wallersdorf–Münchshofen railway  was a  metre gauge  railway in the province of  Lower Bavaria  in southern  Germany . It was operated from 1926 to the end of 1949 by the Wallersdorf and Country Narrow-Gauge Railway Cooperative ( Kleinbahngenossenschaft Wallersdorf und Umgebung ) whose head office was in Büchling. The line started from the station in the market town of  Wallersdorf , in  Dingolfing-Landau district , and ran to Münchshöfen in the municipality of  Oberschneiding , in  Straubing-Bogen district . The railway was exclusively used by goods trains.

The Lower Bavarian market town of  Wallersdorf  lies in the lower  Isar  valley, 20 kilometres from where the  River Isar  flows into the  Danube  near  Plattling . Today the town is served by the electrified, single-tracked line from  Landshut  to Plattling (KBS 931). The station's former marshalling and loading yards − at kilometre post 52.9 – have been dismantled apart from a simple crossing loop for the current regional passenger and goods trains.

The construction of a  standard gauge  railway from Straubing to  Landau an der Isar  had been approved in 1869 and from 1872 onwards the Gäuboden communities, led by the town of  Straubing , made persistent attempts to have it built, but these efforts remained unsuccessful. As a result, local farmers founded a cooperative to build a narrow-gauge line ( Kleinbahn ) with a junction on the  Landau–Plattling railway . According to Zeitler, [1]  the cooperative was given approval to build the line by a Bavarian law passed on 26 June 1908; the authorised route running from the station in Wallersdorf via Büchling to Münchshöfen. On the largely flat valley of Gäuboden the railway was intended to supply the farmers with goods (fertiliser, coal and building materials) and especially during harvest to transport away produce, mainly sugar beet and cabbages, in a cost-effective manner. The  German Empire  and the  Free State of Bavaria  each contributed 90,000  Reichsmarks  (RM) to the cooperative's capital investment of 187,000 RM. The remainder of the capital was raised from the participating communities and farmers.

Construction did not begin until after the  First World War . It was intended to purchase  narrow-gauge  track and vehicles with a  600 mm  ( 1 ft  11   5 ⁄ 8  in ) gauge cheaply from former Army stock. When this failed, the railway embankment, which had been completed in 1923, was widened to take a  1,000 mm  ( 3 ft  3   3 ⁄ 8  in ) gauge line and the railway went into service on 6 August 1926. The line had a length of 7.7 kilometres (4.8 mi) and a track length of 8.45 kilometres (5.25 mi)

The line ran northwards from the  Reichsbahn  loading yard at Wallersdorf station via  Vierhöfen  (km 2.5) towards Mattenkofen (km 4.2). One kilometre before the village it swung west and reached Büchling (km 5.8) about 500 m north of the village. This was the location for the depot with its coal bunkers, water tanks and a small workshop. Having run on level terrain to this point, the line now ran up a considerable incline of 1:30 for about 250 m in the direction of Münchshöfen. The course of the railway alongside the road to the vicinity of Mattenkofen can still be made out from the trees and bushes on the overgrown trackbed. The line continued on over the field track known as the  Rennweg  to the  goods station  of Münchshöfen (km 7.7) on the road to Fierlbach.

Evidently the railway had  run-around loops  in Wallersdorf and Büchling, and presumably at the terminus in Münchshöfen too. All the loading yards had a section of standard gauge track onto which the standard gauge wagons were off-loaded with the help of oxen or horses. That enable the  transporter wagons  to be freed up to transport other wagons, whilst the goods wagons were loaded or unloaded.

A proposal in 1928 by the  Regensburg Reichsbahn division  to the town of Straubing and other communities in the Gäuboden along the line to Landau to connect it to this branch line was not accepted. Even an extension of the line by about 4 km to Oberschneiding could not be put into effect due to a lack of capital.

The railway company only made a profit in two of its operating years. Only between 7,000 t and 10,000 t of goods were transported annually. The rapid mechanisation of agriculture after the  Second World War  and the urgent need for further investment to keep the line open led to its closure on 31 December 1949 and subsequent dismantling. The station buildings and loading ramps have since been removed leaving no trace.

In 1926 the railway bought five four-axled  transporter wagon  from the firm of  Orenstein & Koppel . Photographs show that these wagons were hauled in the first two years by a light Lenz class construction engine. This locomotive had been used in building the line. In 1928 the  Kleinbahn  cooperative bought engine no. 63 (Krauss 1889/2019, type Cn2t) from the  Valhalla Railway  for 3,727.95 RM. This locomotive, almost 40 years old at that time, had originally been in service in  Thuringia  and  Upper Silesia . In 1932, after a serious accident, they bought locomotive BR 99 133 (Krauss 1922/7986, a  Bavarian Pts 3/4 , type 1Ch2t) that had been laid up two years earlier on the  Neuötting–Altötting railway . This worked on the line until it was closed and was then scrapped.