" Wine ,  women , and  song "  is a  hendiatris  that endorses  hedonistic  lifestyles or behaviors. A more modern form of the idea is often expressed as " sex  and  drugs  and  rock 'n' roll ," a phrase popularized by British singer  Ian Dury  in  his song of the same title .

Similar  tripartite mottoes  have existed for a long time in many languages, for example:

Not all hendiatris including women are positive: in  Greek  – "Πύρ, γυνή και θάλαττα" ("fire, women and the sea") instead suggest three dangers rather than pleasures, and  Turkish   At, Avrat, Silah  ("horse, woman, weapon") offers the three essentials of quite another culture.

The following "tetrad" (using four concepts rather than three) predates all of the above [ citation needed ] :

The English  couplet  "Who loves not woman, wine, and song / Remains a fool his whole life long" appears in print as early as 1837, translated from German verse attributed to Martin Luther. [1]   John Addington Symonds  used the phrase "Wine, Women and Song" as the title for his 1884 book of translations of medieval Latin students' songs. [2]  Ironically, Symonds is largely known today for his passionate writings about male  homosexual love .

The phrase in  German  is apparently older than in English. Symonds and the anonymous 1837 writer both provide the German text, attributing it to Luther. The attribution to Luther has been questioned, however, [3] [4]  and the earliest known reference in German is to a folksong first printed in 1602. [5]   Bartlett's Familiar Quotations  cites  Johann Heinrich Voss  (1751–1826) as a likely source, [3]  but any use by him would have to be a later use of the phrase.

The  waltz  "Wine, Women and Song" ( Wein, Weib und Gesang ) is Op. 333 (1869) of  Johann Strauss II .

The lines  Deutsche Frauen, deutsche Treue, / Deutscher Wein, und deutscher Sang  (German women, German loyalty, / German wine, and German song) are found in the second verse of  Das Lied der Deutschen ,  the third verse of which is the  German national anthem .

Omne mundi trinum, 
mulier, tabacum, vinum, 
et qui curat de pluribus, 
maximus est asinus!